THE ANNALS OF THE COMPUTATION LABORATORY
OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY

VOLUME I
LONDON : GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
A MANUAL OF OPERATION
FOR THE
AUTOMATIC SEQUENCE CONTROLLED
CALCULATOR

BY

THE STAFF OF THE COMPUTATION LABORATORY

WITH A FOREWORD BY

JAMES BRYANT CONANT

TE
Ls

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1946

i703
Copyright, 1946
By the President and Fellows of Harvard College

(Reproduction in whole or in part is authorized and permitted.)

‘The opinions or assertions contained herein are the private ones
of the writers and are not to be construed as official or reflecting
the views of the Navy Department or the naval service at large.

Printed in the United States of America
STAFF OF THE COMPUTATION LABORATORY

Comdr. Howard H. Aiken, USNR
Officer in Charge

Lt. Comdr. Hubert A. Arnold, USNR
Lt. Harry E. Goheen, USNR
Lt. Grace M. Hopper, USNR
Lt(jg) Richard M. Bloch, USNR
Lt(jg) Robert V. D. Campbell, USNR
Lt(jg) Brooks J. Lockhart, USNR
Ens. Ruth A. Brendel, USNR

William A. Porter, CEM
Frank L. Verdonck, Y1/c
Delo A. Calvin, Sp(D1/c
Hubert M. Livingston, Sp(I)1/c
John F. Mahoney, Sp(1)1/c
Durward R. White, Sp(I)1/c
Geary W. Huntsberger, MMS2/c
John M. Hourikan, MMS3/c

Kenneth C. Hanna
Joseph O. Harrison, Jr.
Robert L. Hawkins
Ruth G. Knowlton
Eunice H. MacMasters
Frederick G. Miller
John W. Roche
Robert E. Wilkins
FOREWORD

No combination of printed words can ever do justice to the real story of an
undertaking in which cooperation between men of capacity and genius is of the
essence. The development of the IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator
is such a story, with many fascinating chapters. To understand the significance
of this fruitful collaboration between the International Business Machines Cor-
poration and Harvard University one would have to trace the history of this
company, which for many years has been collaborating with leading universities
and research organizations and continuously developing and adapting its equip-
ment for use in the fields of scientific computations. Harvard University’s need
for a machine such as the IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator has
long been a matter of discussion in several of the scientific departments of the
University. Because of the well-known policy of the International Business
Machines Corporation, Professor Aiken of our staff turned to this company to
discuss the possibility of building a calculating machine. To quote from Mr.
Aiken’s own words,

“Our first contact with that company was with Mr. J. W. Bryce. Mr. Bryce
for more than thirty years has been an inventor of calculating machine parts, and
when I first met him he had to his credit over four hundred fundamental inventions
— something more than one a month. They involved counters, multiplying and
dividing apparatus, and all of the other machines and parts which I have not the
time to mention, which have become components of the Automatic Sequence
Controlled. Calculator... .

“With this vast experience in the field of calculating machinery, our suggestion
for a scientific machine was quickly taken and quickly developed. Mr. Bryce at
once recognized the possibilities. He at once fostered and encouraged this project,
and the multiplying and dividing unit included in the machine is designed by him.

“On Mr. Bryce’s recommendation, the construction and design of the machine
were placed in the hands of Mr. C. D, Lake, at Endicott, and Mr. Lake called into
the job Mr. Frank E. Hamilton.and Mr. Benjamin M. Durfee, two of his associates.

“The early days of the job consisted largely of conversations — conversations
in which I set forth requirements of the machine for scientific purposes, and in
FOREWORD
which the other gentlemen set forth the properties of the various machines which
they had developed, which they had invented, and based on those conversations
the work proceeded until the final form of the machine came into being.”

It is not my function in this brief foreword to attempt to summarize the
detailed history of the development of the IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator; this has been done admirably in a little booklet published by the
International Business Machines Corporation. The readers of this and subsequent
volumes will, however, be interested in the fact that a whole series of inventions
by IBM engineers are incorporated in the machine as basic units; the names of
Mr. Bryce and Mr. Lake appear frequently on such a list. Here is a striking
example of the way in which the accomplishments of engineers of a great corpora-
tion may enrich many fields of human endeavor. While the public has frequently
been told of the ways in which advances in pure science benefit industry, all too
little is known of the way in which advances in industry benefit science. I hope
the story of the IBM Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator may to some
degree right the balance.

On August 7, 1944, Mr. Thomas J. Watson, on behalf of the International
Business Machines Corporation, presented Harvard University with the IBM
Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator. Since that date the machine has been
in constant use by the Navy Department on confidential work. Therefore, Mr.
Watson’s gift came at a time when the new instrument his company had created
was able to serve the country in time of war, before being used for the peaceful
advance of knowledge. It will serve in the future as a focal point for certain types
of mathematical work which the machine is unique in handling. I am told it is
already clear that highly significant discoveries in pure and applied science will
be possible through its use. Therefore, I cannot refrain from concluding this brief
foreword by paying tribute to Mr. Watson. Harvard is indebted to him for a
most generous gift; far more important, the scientific world is indebted to him
for the development by his company of new tools which he has ever been ready
eo aut at the di

to put at the disposal of the scientific and learned world.

James Bryant CONANT
PREFACE

In May 1944, the Staff of the Computation Project began operations with
the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator as an activity of the Bureau of
Ships. One of the first tasks undertaken was the preparation of a report setting
forth the coding procedures of the calculator. This was followed by detailed
plugging instructions, which unfortunately were hardly completed before the code
book was out of date. In the succeeding months, computing techniques were
developed so rapidly that stabilized operating instructions could not be prepared.

At the same time, many mathematicians, physicists, and engineers requested
copies of such data on operating techniques as were available‘in the laboratory.
This general and widespread interest encouraged the Staff to publish this Manual
of Operation as the first volume of the Annals of the Computation Laboratory,
rather than as a mimeographed compilation of notes as originally intended. Thus
the Manual is unusual in that it is an outgrowth of notes prepared by the Staff
primarily for their own use. The Manual is also exceptional in that it represents
the work of a great many people whose efforts have been closely integrated as is
necessary in the operation of large-scale calculating machines. Chapters I and II
represent extensions and revisions by Lt. Grace Murray Hopper, USNR, of the
writer’s old notes, many of which were written before work on the calculator was
begun. Chapter III was written by Lieutenant Hopper with the collaboration of
other members of the Staff. Chapters IV and V represent the outgrowth of the
original code book and plugging instructions prepared by the writer and Lt(jg)
Robert V. D. Campbell, USNR. Nearly every member of the Staff has made con-
tributions to these chapters, but Lt(jg) Richard M. Bloch, USNR, especially
should be mentioned. Chapter VI is made up of the solutions of elementary
examples chosen from those assigned by the Officer in Charge to new members of
the Staff as part of their instruction in the use of the calculator. Those given
in Chapter VI were largely the work of Lt(jg) Brooks J. Lockhart, USNR.

The bibliography: of numerical analysis is the result of the library work of
the Staff in connection with the problems assigned to the project. Work on the
bibliography was begun by Lt. Comdr. Hubert A. Arnold, USNR, and completed
by Lt. Harry E. Goheen, USNR, assisted by Ens. Ruth A. Brendel, USNR.
PREFACE

The appendices were prepared by Lieutenant Hopper with the assistance of
Ensign Brendel, Robert L. Hawkins, and Eunice H. MacMasters. Mrs. MacMasters
drew all the figures and diagrams in the book. Ruth G. Knowlton and Frank L.
Verdonck, Y1/c, USNR, are responsible for the typography. The photographs of
the calculator and the films from which the plates for printing the book were
made are the work of Paul Donaldson, photographer of Cruft Laboratory. Lieu-
tenant Hopper also acted as general editor, and more than any other person is
responsible for the completion of the book.

In less than two years, twenty-three reports were completed for the Bureau
of Ships. On the first of January 1946, the project was transferred to the Bureau
of Ordnance under whose cognizance it is now functioning. The gratitude of the
Staff is extended to the Bureau of Ordnance and to the Bureau of Ships for the
privilege of working with the calculator.

This Manual was made necessary by the existence of the calculator itself.
The writer therefore takes this opportunity to express his appreciation to Thomas
J. Watson, President of the International Business Machines Corporation, for his
support during the years the machine was under construction, and to C. D. Lake,
F. E. Hamilton, and B. M. Durfee, engineers of the company, who together with
the writer are the coinventors of the machine.

Howarp H. AIkEN
Commander, USNR
Officer in Charge
Cambridge, Massachusetts
March 1946
Chapter

Appendix

I

<

Sas <

Historical Introduction . . .
Description of the Calculator
Electrical Circuits, ....
Coding... we eee eee
Plugging Instructions... .
Solution of Examples . ...
Bibliography. . . . «so e

Introduction to the Appendices

Sequence Codes ......
Sequence Circuits .....
Register Circuits. .....
Multiply Unit Circuits, . ..
Divide Unit Circuits ....
Relay List. . . 2... 2 ee
Cam List... 2... 2 eee
Fuse List... . 2. eee

Index . 2... eee ee wo

CONTENTS

10
53
98
245
287
338
405

411
431
437
457
499
528
550
555
557
Number

I

<

Heine xw ne dS Se

XIV
xV
XVI
Xvi

LIST OF PLATES

Calculating Wheels designed by Charles Babbage... ... 2. ee ee

Front View of the Calculator... 1... ws ese e ee ete eee

Front View of the Calculator... 1... ee se ee eee ew eae

Rear View of the Storage Counter Unit and the Multiply-Divide Relay Panel

Rear View of the Multiply-Divide Counters and Relay Panel

Sequence Control Mechanism... «ss. ee we ee
Tape Racks... 6 se ee ee we ee we ww es
Switches... 1 we ewe eee et eet we eee
Storage Counters .... 6. cee eo we wee we eee
Storage Counter Relays ... 2... 20 se eee woe
Multiply-Divide and Functional Counters. .......
Sequence Control Mechanism and Interpolators. ... .
Interpolator, .. 2. we ee eee re eee eens
Typewriters, Card Feeds and Card Punch .......
Tape Punch... 1. ss ee cece ere ccene
Relays andCam, .. 6. ee ee see eee sree

Storage Counter, . 2. we ew eee ee we we es

Facing
Page

10
11
14
15
16
17
20
21
38

39
42
43
54
55
I Calculating Wheels designed by Charles Babbage
CHAPTER I
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION
"If, unwarned by my example, any man shall undertake and shall succeed in really
constructing an engine embodying in itself the whole of the executive department of mathe-
matical analysis upon different principles or by simpler mechanical means,I have no fear

of leaving my reputation in his charge, for he alone will be fully able to appreciate the

nature of my efforts and the value of their results,"

Charles Babbage
"The Life of a Philosopher" (1864)

The desire to economize time and mental effort in arithmetical computation, and to eliminate
human liability to error,is probably as old as the science of arithmetic itself, This desire has led to
the design and construction of a variety of aids tocomputation beginning with "groups of small objects
such as pebbles, used first loosely, later as 'counters' on ruled boards, and later. still as beads
mounted on wires fixed in a frame, constituting the abacus" J

It seems most likely that the abacus originated in the Tigris-Euphrates valley,”

and that its use
traveled both east and west along the routes of the caravans, Elaboration of the instrument and later
development of the techniques of its manipulation made it applicable to multiplication, division, and
even to the extraction of square and cube roots, as well as to addition and subtraction for which the
instrument was probably originally intended, Indeed, the abacus, despite its ancient origin, is still
in use by the oriental peoples, This long period of utility is due not only to the simplicity of the instru-
ment, but also due to two fundamental notions inherent in its construction. Place significance, or the
use of zero to signify an empty column, is provided by the several wires on which the beads are strung.
Moreover, the principle of carry, whereby the (n + 1)st column is increased by one when the nth has
become exhausted, is applied in adding,

After the invention of the abacus, five thousand years elapsed before the next computational aid
was developed, During this time, gears and pointers were used inthe design of clocks. These machine
elements, and more especially a wheel which at the end of a complete revolution gave impetus to a
second wheel, paved the way for the development of calculating machinery.

In 1617, John Napier, following his invention of logarithms, published an account of his number-

ing rods, known as “ Napier's bones" 3 Various forms of the bones appeared, some approaching the
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

beginning of mechanical computation. Subsequent to the introduction of logarithms, the slide rule?

was developed by Oughtred (1630), Everard (1755), Mannheim (1850) and others. The slide rule re-
ceived wide recognitionfrom scientists as early as 1700, Particularly in engineering design, the slide
rule has proved an invaluable instrument. It has been increasingly applied to the solution of problems
requiring an accuracy of not more than three or four significant figures and where the total bulk of
the computation is not extensive, The slide rule is probably the most useful computational aid so far
devised; its low cost, ease of construction, and the simplicity of its principle of operation and of its
use, make the instrument of primary importance, The slide rule is probably the ancestor of all those
calculating devices whose operation is based upon an analogy between numbers and physical magni-
tudes, in which the computed results are obtained by physical measurements, Many such analogy
devices have since been constructed, Examples of these are the planimeter, integraph, Kelvin's tide
predicter and finally the differential analyzer. Allanalogy devices, like the slide rule, are limited to
the accuracy of a physical measurement,

It was Blaise Pascal? who, in 1642, designed and built the first mechanical adding machine in
the modern sense of the term. Incidentally, it should be noted that Pascal's machine was designed not
to further scientific research but rather for usein his father’s mercantile business, It was an account-
ing machine and as such was the forerunner of the modern accounting machine and cash register. The
design of Pascal's machine depended upon rotating wheels and provided for carry by mechanically
turning the wheel of next higher order one position when the lower passed from nine to zero, The
direct actuation of a numbered wheel and the secondary feature of effecting carry (which seem to have
been first used in an adding machine by Pascal) are the foundation on which nearly all mechanical cal-
culating machines have since been constructed,

Naturally, any machine designed for addition may also perform subtraction by means of comple-
mentary numbers, The complement on ten of a number is that second number which must be added to
the first in order to obtain a power of ten. The complement on ten of a number may be read off from
left to right by taking the complement on nine of each successive digit except the last on the right, of
which the complement on ten must be taken. Thus the complement on ten of 7528 is 2472, If it is de-

sired to subtract 7528 from any number, for example, 38421, the work may be written,
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

38421 - 7528 = (38421 - 10000) + (10000 - 7528) = 28421 + 2472 = 30893.
This procedure may further be simplified by the use of complements on nine and "end around carry" &
End around carry implies carry from the highest column of a machine to the lowest column of the
machine, The complement on nine of 7528 ina sixcolumn machineis 992471, Subtraction now becomes

038421 + 992471 + 000001 = 030893, .
where the third term, 000001, is supplied by end around carry.

If any number, 007364, is added to 999999, operation of the machine will yield,

999999 + 007364 + 000001 = 007364,
where the third term is again the result of end around carry. Since, under these conditions, 999999 is
a number having the properties of zero for machine purposes, the complement on nine of any number
may be adopted as the negative of the number. Clearly, an n digit calculating machine must be sup-
plied with (n + 1) columns, the highest being reserved for the algebraic sign, zero and nine being
positive and negative respectively.

The next major development in mechanical aids to numerical computation came in 1666 when
Samuel Morland? built a machine similar to Pascal's, adapted to multiplication by repeated addition.
Independently, in 1671, Leibnitz® conceived a multiplying machine and finished it in 1694, In Pascal's
machine the wheels were set and turned individually by hand; in Leibnitz' machine all wheels were
set and turned simultaneously by a crank to a previously determined position. In the "stepped reckoner",
Leibnitz added a device which still occurs as a component part of modern calculating machines.

In the years that followed, methods of carrying were refined and calculating machines soon added

by a process not used by the human mind, The addition of two numbers, 3279 and 8935, requires the

following mental steps:

3279
8935
4 add units digits
1 carry
14 add tens digits
1 carry
214 add thousands digits
1 carry
2214 add ten-thousands digits
1 carry

12214
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

In adding two numbers, a machine may add all digits simultaneously, store the individual carry num-
bers and then perform all carrying operations simultaneously. For example,
3279
8935
1104 sum without carry
1111 carry numbers
T2214
Thus the machine consumes not more than two steps for any addition,no matter how many significant
digits there may be in the terms of the addition.

From the seventeenth century on, it was even more evident that precise and rapid methods of
computation were required, The computation of tables of logarithms demanded by Napier's discovery,
of tables of sines and cosines, of tables of tides needed by faster and more extensive navigation and
of the astronomical tables envisioned by Kepler, accentuated this need. Among many others, Gauss,
Cayley, Tchebychev, Maxwell and Kelvin all attempted to devise or improve computational aids 3 Natu-
rally these menall considered mechanical calculation largely from their own point of view, the desire
to further scientific advancement, Despite this widespread interest, the development of modern cal-
culating machinery proceeded slowly until the growth of commercial enterprise and the increasing
complexity of accoumting made mechanical computation an economic necessity. Thus the ideas of the
physicists and mathematicians, who foresaw the possibilities and gave the fundamentals, were turned
to excellent purposes, but differing greatly from those for which they were originally intended,

It was not until just before the beginning of the nineteenth century that any attempt was made to
build highly specialized calculating machines designed for the mathematical and physical sciences, A
Hessian military engineer, J. H. Miller,10 seems to have had the first idea of a difference engine in
1786, But this idea remained in a purely theoretical state and was without doubt forgotten when, in
1812, it occurred to Charles Babbage and he set about the actual construction of such an engine,!!
This engine was to "perform the whole operation-(the computation and printing of tables of functions)
~without any mental attention when once the given numbers have been put into the machine",!2 A first
model was built in 1820-22 and consisted of six columns using second differences. In 1823, the con-

struction of an engine using twenty-six significant digits and sixth differences was begun with the aid

of a subvention from the British government. The construction continued until 1833 when the govern-
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

ment aid was withdrawn, The unfinished machine is preserved in the collections of the Science
Museum in South Kensington. It should be borne in mind that the difference engine, although a highly
useful scientific instrument, was still a specialized machine being intended for the sole purpose of
tabulating the values of a function for equidistant values of the argument,
Having been unable to complete the difference engine, Babbage embarked upon the creation of a
far more ambitious concept, an " analytical engine w 13 Though the terms of the problem proposed
‘were enough to stagger the contemporary imagination, he attempted to design a machine capable of
carrying out not just a single arithmetical operation, but whole series of such operations without the
intervention of an operator, The numbers in the first part of the machine, called the "store", were to
be operated upon by the second part of the machine, called the "mill", A succession of selected oper-
ations were to be executed mechanically at the command of a'"'sequence mechanism" (a term unknown
to Babbage), For this latter, he intended to use a variation of the Jacquard cards,/4
These cards,! the precursors of Hollerith's punched cards, were used by the Jacquard weavers
to control the looms to produce and reproduce the patterns designed by the artists. The designs were
first sketched as they were to appear in the finished product, transferred to squared paper and used
as guides for punching the cards. The cards allowed certain needles to be extended through the punched
holes, thereby controlling hooks which, in turn, raised particular warp threads to produce the desired
pattern. In order to continue the weaving of the same design, the cards were interlaced with twine in
an endless sequence so that one card was brought into position immediately after another was used.
Holes were punched for the lacings as well as for the pegs which guided the cards over a cylinder.
In adapting these cards for use in his machine, Babbage required two decks: one of variable
cards and one of operational cards, The first set was designed to select the particular numbers to be
operated upon from the store; the second set, to select the operation to be performed by the mill. The
deck of operation cards therefore represented the solution of a mathematical situation independent of
the values of the parameters and variables involved, Thus the analytical engine was to have been
completely general as regards algebraic operations.

In order to use selected values of transcendental and other functions, the engine was to be equip-

ped with a mechanism to call for such functions, Having stopped and rung a bell, a certain part of the
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

machine would: indicate that a particular value of a particular function was required, The attendant
would then insert a punched card containing the desired function and its argument, The machine then
checked the card to make sure that it was the one requested, by subtracting the argument of the in-
serted card from the argument standing in the machine. If the difference was zero, the engine would
continue its computation. If an incorrect card was supplied, the engine would "ring a louder bell and
stop" 16

As in the difference engines, the analytical engine was to print its own results, Further, a
mechanism was to have been added for punching numerical results in blank cards for future use. In
this way, the engine could compute the tables required and punch its own cards " entirely free from
error" Pall

In 1852, Charles Babbage said: "Ata period when the progress of physical science is obstruct-
ed by that exhausting intellectual and mental labor indispensable for its advancement, which it is the
object of the Analytical Engine to relieve, think the application of machinery in aid of the most com-
plicated and abstruse calculations can no longer be deemed unworthy of the attention of the country.
In fact there is no reason why mental as well as bodily labor should not be economized by the aid of
machinery"'8 He felt most strongly that the time must arrive when no table would ever be calculated
or printed except by machine. It was of the utmost importance, he thought, to accelerate the arrival
of the time, "when the completion of a calculating engine shall have produced a substitute for -(manual
computation, so that)-the attention of the analysts will naturally be directed to simplifying its appli-
cation by a new discussion of the methods of converting analytical formulae into numbers" .”~

In 1834, George Scheutz,2°a printer in Stockholm, built a less ambitious difference engine with
the aid of a grant from the Swedish government, The machine was completed in 1853 and used for the
computation and printing of tables of logarithms, sines and logarithms of sines. It was exhibited at
the Paris exposition in 1855 and later became the property of the Dudley Observatory in Albany, New
York. From Sweden also came Wiberg's difference machine”4 (1863) which was presented to the
Academy of Sciences in Paris by the astronomer Delaunay.

One of the first Americans to build a difference machine was G.B.Grant of Cambridge, Massa-

chusetts, who needed a machine for his " computing for excavation and embankment " 22 Encouraged
ofp

Front View of the Calculator

II
Til Front View of the Calculator
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

in his designs by Professor Wolcott Gibbs of the Harvard Mining School, Grant successfully built a
small model in 1871 under Professor Benjamin Peirce, then superintendent of the Coast Survey. This
machine was designed to contain the usual calculating and printing parts contained in Babbage's and
Scheutz' engines, but with considerable improvement in the printing mechanism ,2° Grant's indebted-
ness for assistance in his study was expressed to John N. Bachelder of Cambridge and to Professors
Eustis, Winlock, and Whitney of Harvard.

In 1893, Torres?4 restated Babbage's problem: to construct a purely automatic calculator capa-
ble of carrying out any succession of arithmetical operations on any given numbers, without human
intervention from the time when the operations have been indicated until the time when the machine
sends the results to a printing device. Torres had available electro-mechanical counters and both
electrical and mechanical controls, He gave a solution to the problem and proved that such a machine
was theoretically possible, although his solution was not free from certain complications due to the
multiplicity of the electrical connections assumed.

Despite the partial successes of Scheutz, Wiberg and Grant, the problem of designing calculating
machinery was abandoned by the students of science and left in the hands of the inventors, For the
purposes of accounting, these men, both in this country and abroad, with the aid of the improved ma-
terials and tools created during the industrial revolution, succeeded in bringing key driven calculating
machines to a high state of perfection. The use of punched cards as a means of storing numbers and
all the associated mechanisms, developed by Bryce, Carrol, Lake, Hamilton, Daly and Durfee of the
International Business Machines Corporation brought the possibility of scientific calculating machinery .
again into a position where the situation could be viewed with some hope of success,

In 1906, H.P, Babbage, son of the philosopher, completed a part of the analytical engine. A table
of multiples of « which it computed to twenty-nine significant digits was published as a specimen of

«75 Clearly then, Babbage's failure to complete either of his projects himself was not due to

its wor
a lack of understanding of the principles and purposes of the engines that he designed, but rather to
his lack of machine tools, materials of construction and electrical circuits, Of these deficiencies, the
first was probably the most important, Also, Babbage was a "natural philosopher" .28 His machines

were perforce built by hired engineers 2 7 He himself was not " well-acquainted" with the medium in
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

which he chose to work.78 Therefore, though his principles were theoretically sound and though he

was successful to a limited extent, it remained for the twentieth century and the evolution of advanced

mechanical and electrical engineering to bring his ideas into being.

10.

11,

12,

13,

- References

D. Baxandall, Catalogue of the Collections in the Science Museum, South Kensington. Mathe-
matics I Calculating Machines and Instruments (1926), p. 7.

F, Cajori, History of Mathematics (1919), p. 7; L. Jacob, Le calcul mécanique (1911), p.3;C.G.
Knott, The calculating machine of the east: the abacus, in Modern Instruments and Methods of
Calculation, E. M. Horsburgh, ed. (1914), pp. 136-154; M. d'Ocagne, Le calcul simplifie (1905),
p.7.

GA. Gi

Nie die i

, Napier and the invention of logarithms, in Modern Instruments and Methods of
Calculation, E. M. Horsburgh, ed, (1914), pp. 1-16

F. Cajori, History of the Logarithmic Slide Rule (1909); F, Cajori, William Oughtred (1916); A.
Galle, Mathematische Instrumente (1912), pp. 1-21; Jacob, op. cit., pp. 96-109; d'Ocagne, ibid.,
pp. 105-128; G.D.C.Stokes, The slide rule, in Modern Instruments and Methods of Calculation,
E.M. Horsburgh, ed. (1914), pp. 155-180.

S. Chapman, Blaise Pascal (1623-1662), Nature, 150; 508-509 (1942); d'Ocagne, ibid., pp. 24-
31; J. A. V. Turck, Origin of Modern Calculating Machines (1921), pp. 11-13.

Crompton Patent, U. S., No. 1514954, claim no. 7,
Baxandall, op, cit., pp. 8, 14-16; d'Ocagne, ibid., p. 30.

Jacob, op. cit., pp. 39-46; d'Ocagne, ibid., p. 30; M. d'Ocagne, Machines A calculer (1922),
pp. 21-23,

Baxandall, op. cit.; Jacob, op. cit.; d'Ocagne, ibid.; Modern Instruments and Methods of Calcu-
lation, E, M. Horsburgh, ed, (1914).

F. Cajori, History of Mathematics (1919), p. 485; Jacob, op. cit., pp. 114-115; d’Ocagne, Le
calcul simplifi¢ (1905), p. 82.

Charles Babbage, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (1864), chap. V, "Difference Engine
No.1", pp. 41-96; Baxandall, op. cit., pp. 30-34.

Babbage, ibid., p. 41.

Babbage, ibid., chap. VII, "Of the Analytical Engine", pp. 112-141; Jacob, op. cit., pp. 188-190;
P, E. Ludgate, Automatic calculating machines, in Modern Instruments and Methods of Calcu-
lation, E. M. Horsburgh, ed. (1914) pp. 124-127,

Babbage, ibid., pp. 116-117.

E. A. Posselt, The Jacquard Machine (189-?), op. 9, 17-20, 85-102.

Babbage, ibid., pp. 119-120.
17.
18,
19,

20,

21,
22,

23,

24,

25.
26,
27,
28,

HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION >

Babbage, ibid., p. 122.
Babbage, ibid., p. 106.
Charles Babbage, Economy of Machinery and Manufactures (1846), p. 195.

Charles Babbage, Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (1864), p. 48; Baxandall, op. cit.,
pp. 32, 34-36; Jacob, op. cit., pp. 115-117; d'Ocagne, ibid., pp. 83-86.

Jacob, op. cit., pp, 117-123; d'Ocagne, ibid., pp. 86-87,

G. B. Grant, On a new difference engine, American Journal of Sciences and Arts (3) 2; 113-117
(1871).

Jacob, op. cit., p. 45.

Jacob, op. cit., pp. 165-169, 189-200; d'Ocagne, ibid., p. 95; M. d'Ocagne, Machines 4 calculer
(1922), pp. 49-53.

Ludgate, op. cit., p. 127.
Cf. the title of his book, "Passages from the Life of a Philosopher".
Babbage, ibid., pp. 79-82.

Babbage, ibid., p. 92,
- 10

CHAPTER II
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR
"Interpolation ist die Kunst zwischen den Zeilen einer Tafel zu lesen," .
T.N. Thiele
"Interpolationsrechnung". (1909)
Although a method of interpolation bearing some resemblance to modern central difference

2 introduced the notion

formulae was used by Briggs! in 1624,it was not until 1670 that James Gregory
of interpolation based upon the representation of functions by means of approximating polynomials.
The use of approximating polynomials reduced the whole problem of the tabulation and subtabulation
of functions, over a limited range of the argument, to the arithmetical operations of addition and sub-
traction alone, once the necessary initial differences were established. Thereby the basic principle
was given for the operation of the difference engines briefly mentioned in the foregoing chapter.

Further development of the theory of interpolation by Newton, Stirling and others laid the foun-
dation for the Calculus of Finite Differences set forth as a new branch of mathematics by Taylor in
1715", Since that time the subject has been increasingiy developed so that now a variety of techniques
are available for numerical differentiation and for the numerical evaluation of definite integrals. The
latter include the formulae of Gregory, Cotes, Euler-Maclaurin, Simpson, Weddle, Gauss, Tchebychev
and Steffensen‘, .

In 1883, Adams and Bashforth®, using the methods of finite differences, devised a technique for
the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, This has been followed by many other methods,
that given by Runge in 1895°, and improved and extended by Kutta in 19017 being, perhaps, the best
known. More recently methods have been given for the numerical solution of partial differential
equations. The extension and application of these methods present one of the most important prob-
lems in mathematics at the present time. |

In every case, the effect of the numerical methods has been to reduce the processes of mathe-
matical analysis to a sequence of the five fundamental operations of arithmetic: addition, subtraction,

multiplication, division and reference to tables of previously computed results, Thus the calculus of

finite differences has become the bridge between mathematical analysis and numerical computation,
Nisin

“8 ué
et

2

*
a
i
oe
4
i
b
I

IV Rear View of the Storage Counter Unit and the Multiply-Divide Relay Panel
ee
a
e.
2
r)

V_ Rear View of the Multiply-Divide Counters and Relay Panel
11

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Unfortunately, the application of numerical methods is attended by a relatively great amount of compu-
tational labor, so that while existing types of calculating machinery are sufficient from a theoretical
viewpoint, they are entirely inadequate from a practical standpoint. It is for this reason that the
Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator has been constructed.

In 1937, the calculator was visualized "as a switchboard on which are mounted various pieces
of calculating machine apparatus, Each panel of the switchboard is given over to definite mathematical
operations,"® ‘It stands today much as originally imagined, in a stainless steel and glass case, fifty-
one feet long and eight feet high, (Plates Il and III). Two panels, each six feet long, extend at right
angles from the back of the machine. Between these two panels is the four horsepower motor which
drives the mechanical parts, (Plates IV and V). Altogether the machine weighs about five tons.

The calculator is equipped with a central multiplying and dividing unit together with seventy-two
adding-storage registers and sixty constant registers corresponding tothe mill and storeof Babbage's
proposed analytical engine, In addition, the machine is supplied with electro—mechanical tables of
log, o” 10% and sine x. Three non-linear interpolator units are capable of interpolation of any order
up to and including the eleventh, on functions supplied to them in the form of perforated paper tape.
Other computing elements included are: two card feeds for supplying the machine with empirical or
other data, a card punch for punching results in tabulating machine cards, two automatic typewriters.
for recording computed results and an automatic sequence unit having control of the machine as a whole.

The sequence control unit, shown in Plate VI, consists of a maindrive sprocket drum over which
runs a perforated paper tape, called a control tape, together with such gears, cams and clutches as
are necessary to advance the drum and tape one line of perforations at a time. The tape is strung on
racks in back of the machine as shown in Plate VII and held taut by a roller just below the sequence
mechanism, The sequence unit is equipped with a set of twenty-four sensing pins, controlled by a
crosshead, which are advanced at the end of each forward step of the tape to detect the distribution of
holes in one line of the tape and to close electric contacts in the same distribution.

Each horizontal line of the tape has space for twenty-four equidistant holes, these being con-
sidered as three groups of eight holes each, known as the A, B and C groups, (Plate VI). The A group

of holes controls the "out-relays " by means of which all units in the machine are connected to the
12

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

central distribution buss over which numbers are transferred from one unit to another with the aid of
timed electrical impulses later to be described. The B group of holes controls the "in-relays" of all
of the units in the machine, These also connect the units to the central distribution buss, and when
closed, permit the egress of numbers from the buss into the units. Finally, the C group of holes repre-
sent, in general, an operation to be performed on the number in unit A in connection with the number
in unit B.

Each horizontal line of holes perforated inthe tape is the equivalent of a single spoken command,
“Take the number out of unit A; deliver it to unit B; start operation C." Since the A, B and C groups
of perforations each contain eight holes,the maximum number of out,in or miscellaneous operational
relays which can be controlled by the machine is 28 ~ 256 each, The maximum possible number of
commands which can be represented by a single line of holes is 224 (256)3 = 16,777,216, Actually,
many of these are not used,and many others are invalid because of special features to be made clear
in Chapter IV on Coding. The number of combinations of coded perforations in use at present is con-
siderably smaller than the maximum possible number, In any event, a very great many possibilities
are available in each line of perforations, Since the number of consecutive lines of holes is in no way
limited, it is apparent that control tapes may be provided with great generality. The reiteration of
the single command, "Take the number out of unit A; deliver it to unit B; start operation C", permuting
A and B over the various units of the machine, while changing the nature of the operation C, is suf-
ficient to guide the machine through any problem of mathematics capable of reduction to the five
fundamental operations of numerical analysis.

At the left of the machine, as wel! as at the left of Fig. 1,are the sixty constant registers. Each
constant register consists of twenty-four manually set ten-pole dial switches designed to accommodate
twenty-three digits and the algebraic sign, Because of their composition, the constant registers are
commonly known as the sixty "switches", Each constant register or switch is connected to the buss
through its out-relay, (Plate VII), and each is connected to the common transfer terminal of the storage
register invert relay. The normally closed and normally open contacts of this relay are in turn con-
nected to the direct and invert cam controlled contacts, respectively, which furnish the timed electrical

impulses necessary to the transfer of numbers via the buss.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

BUSS

13

_ FROM FIG. 12 TO FIG. 2 _
SWITGH STORAGE STORAGE
OUT COUNTER COUNTER
RELAY OUT- RELAY IN-RELAY
>—O p—-O- ,
t+ NO. | . NO. fy |
>—O q
tt. No 2 L |
| | t_ NO. 2 o—;
| NO.3 |
I |
wr! [| wn ro t 5 uw
a! SWITCHES | am | co
t | |
! oo STORAGE |
Lio 1 | COUNTERS !
| NO.60 |; ! | !
a eee ee ee
t NO. 72 °
STORAGE |_|
COUNTER
INVERT
RELAY
DIRECT INVERTED
READ-OUT READ- QUT
CAM CAM
CONTACTS CONTACTS
a TO FIG.2_
50 VOLT |D.C.

Figure 1

Y
14

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

To the right of the switches, Fig. 1,are shown diagrammatically the seventy-two storage regis-
ters, Each storage register consists of twenty-four electro-mechanical counter wheels, The storage
registers, usually referred to as "storage counters" or more briefly as "counters", have electrical

| connections similar to those of the switches, In addition, each storage counter is provided with an in-
relay connected to the buss, a complete set of carry controls and a connection to the negative terminal
of the generator.

Plate IX shows a close-up view of twelve columns of the storage counters 16and17 as seen from
the front of the calculator while Plate X shows the relays associated with storage counters in general
and mounted at the back of the machine.

Eachregister in the calculator is provided with a codenumber, The code numbers of the stor
counters 1, 2,3, ..., 71, 72 are 1, 2, 21, ..., 7321, 74 respectively, while the code numbers of switches
1, 2, 3, ..., 59, 60 are 741, 742, 7421, ..., 821, 83 respectively. Similarly, all operations in the cal-
culator have assigned code numbers, For example, code 32 in the operational or miscellaneous group
C controls the storage counter invert relay, and hence is the mathematical equivalent of a minus sign. ~
A complete discussion of all codes will be found in Chapter IV on Coding; the few here given will suf-
fice for present purposes,

Now let it be required that the number x in storage counter number 3, code 21, be added to the

number y in storage counter number 71, code 7321, This operation may be written,

OUT IN MISC,

Take x from ctr. 3 and add it into ctr. 71, al 7321

On the other hand, if it is required to subtract x from y, the coding will be written,

OUT IN MISC,

Take x from ctr. 3 and by means of the invert relay add 21° 7321 32
its complement on nine to ctr, 71; i,e,, subtract x now
in ctr. 3 from y in ctr. 71.

Returning to Fig. 1, the perforations in the control tape corresponding to code 21 in the Out
column, as interpreted by the sequence mechanism, cause the closure of the out-relay of counter 3,
while the code 7321 in the In column causes the closure of the in-relay of counter 71, The blank in

the Miscellaneous column of the coding is interpreted as a plus sign leaving the storage counter invert
Sequence Control Mechanism

VI
VII Tape Racks
15

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

relay in its normally closed position, Thus a complete electrical circuit exists beginning at the posi-
tive terminal of the generator, passing through the cam contacts; through the normally closed contacts
of the storage counter invert relay into counter 3; through counter 3 and its out-relay to the buss; from
the buss to counter 71 through its in-relay; through counter 71 and finally back to the negative termi-
nal of the generator, Hence, the timed electrical impulses produced by the cam contacts are enabled
to transfer the quantity in counter 3 to counter 71 and bring about addition. The detailed mechanisms
by which this is accomplished will be described in Chapter III.

When it is required to subtract x from y, the whole operation is the same except that code 32
in the Miscellaneous column causes the storage counter invert relay to transfer its contacts, This
causes the complement on nine of x to be read out into the buss instead of x itself, Since all storage
counters are equipped with complete carry controls, including end around carry, addition of the comple-
ment on nine completes the process of subtraction as demanded in the example.

Before further considering the functions of the storage counters, it is necessary to discuss
briefly the means by which the calculator is kept in continuous operation. Most mechanisms, once
started, remain in operation until signalled to stop. By contrast, the calculator continues in operation
only so long as the command "continue operation" is repeated, cycle by cycle, and immediately stops
on the first occasion on which this command fails of being given, A Tin the Miscellaneous column of
a line of coding instructs the sequence mechanism to continue operation; i.e., to read the next line,
act upon it and step to the line beyond. Every line of coding must contain a 7 in the Miscellaneous
column or its equivalent in the form of some other automatic continue operation code, Since the storage

counter codes are not such "automatic codes", the two examples of coding already cited should read,

OUT IN MISC.
Take x from ctr. 3 and add itto y inctr. 71. 21 7321 q
Take x from ctr. 3 and subtract it from y in ctr, 71. 21 1321 732

From what has so farbeen said it should now be clear that the storage counters serve more than
one purpose, Each is a complete adding and subtracting machine, and functions as a storage or memory

device, thereby providing the calculator with brackets, parentheses and other signs of association as
16

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

required in mathematical expressions, In addition, relays associated with cach counter provide other
“functions not indicated in the single line diagram, Fig. 1, for reasons of clarity. The nature of these
electrical controls will be set forth in Chapter III; however, their mathematical significance may be
given here,

The quantity in each storage counter may be read out as either a positive or negative absolute
value under the control of the operational codes 2 and 1, respectively, in the Miscellaneous column of
the line of coding. For example, if x lies in storage counter number 23, code 5321, and y in counter

- number 34, code 62, then |x|+ y may be obtained in counter number 34 by the line of coding,

OUT IN MISC.

Add {xl te y. 9321 62 12

The use of absolute magnitudes provides the calculator with a means of dealing with discontinuous
functions, For example, .
(x + [x|)/2x = Oor 1,
according as x is negative or positive.
Each storage counter may be reset to zero by reading into the counter the complement on ten of
the quantity standing in the counter while the carry controls are disabled. This is accomplished for

any storage counter whose code is A, by the line of coding,

‘out | In_ | MISC.

Reset ctr. A. A A 7

Inasmuch as a blank other than 7 in the Miscellaneous column of coding has been defined as a pius
sign, the reset coding requires further explanation. The resetting operation is one which occurs with
great frequency. To eliminate the necessity of writing and rewriting a special reset code in the Miscel-
laneous column, special wiring is included in the machine such that the duplication of a storage counter
code in both the Out and In columns of a line of coding resets the counter concerned,

Of all the computing elements in the calculator, the storage counters are the simpiest, There-
fore, it is relatively easy to alter and to add to their electrical circuits in such a way as not to interfere
with their normal functioning, but at the same time introduce added possible operations, A number of

such special operations have been required in the past, and have been permanently built intothe machine.
Vill Switches
IX Storage Counters
17

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Counter 70 has been equipped with relay circuits which prefix the algebraic sign of the quantity
in counter 70 to the positive absolute value of the quantity standing in any other storage counter when
the latter is read out under the code 432 in the Miscellaneous column. This feature is especially
valuable when dealing with the interpolation of odd functions, since it is only necessary to evaluate
f(x) in order to have available f(-x) = - f(x). Counter 70 is usually called the choice counter for
reasons which are not immediately obvious. For instance, the choice counter makes it possible to
use the two identities, ,

arctan |x| = 3/2 - arctan 1/|x],
arctan (-x) = - arctanx,
to reduce the labor of computing f(x) = arctan x, - o< x <+o., If [x] - 1 is read into counter 170,
and (1/|x| + |x])/2 and (1/Ixl - {x{)/2 are stored in counters B andC respectively, the addition of C
to B under control of counter 70 will give in counter B,
=(1/[x| + [xf)/2 - (1st - [x)/2 = Ist, if |x| < 1;
z =(1/[x| + [x])/2 + (1/]x| - [x})/2 = 1/ix|, if |x] >1.
Thus only arctan z, 0 < z <1, need be computed by the machine and stored in counter D. If 7/4 and
x/4'- arctan z are stored in counters E and F respectively, the addition of F to E under control of

the choice counter gives in counter E,

us */4-arctanz- */4 =- arctan z
=- arctan [x], if |x} <1;
u= */4-are tanz+%/4 = 2/2 - arctanz

*/2 - arctan 1/|x|, if |x| > 1.
Transferring u to counter G under control of the choice counter gives
v =arctan |x|, if |x} <1;
v= */2 - arctan 1/ |x| =arctan [x], if jx] >1.
It now remains only to prefixthe algebraic sign of x; the choice counter istherefore reset and x read
in. The read-out of v to counter H under control of the choice counter completes the evaluation of f(x),
f(x) = arctan x =arctan |x|, x24 0;

f(x) = arctan x = - arctan [x|, x<s-0.
18

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Inasmuch as the manipulation of the choice counter in the computation of arctan x is typical of
many similar applications, the necessary coding will be given in detail.
Let counter A =x, counter B = (1/ix| + |x1)/2, counter C = (1/[x| - [x])/2,
switch 1 =1, switch 2 = */4

and counters D, E, F, G, H and 70 be reset and available for computation.

OUT IN MISC.

jx{ to ctr. 70 A 132 12
- 1 to ctr. 70 741 732 132
ctr. C to ctr, B under control of ctr, 70; ctr. B =z Cc B 7432

The calculator now computes arctan z and delivers it to counter D,

x/4to ctr, E 742 E 7
«/4 to ctr. F 142 F 7

- arctan zto ctr. E D E 132
ctr. F to ctr. E under control of ctr. 70; ctr. E =u ¥F E 7432
ctr. E to ctr, G under control of ctr. 70; ctr.G =v E G 7432
reset ctr. 70 732 732 7

x to ctr, 70 A 732 7
arctan x to ctr. H G H 7432

The use of the choice counter to construct discontinuous functions and to choose among two or
more functions is treated in detail in Chapter IV.

Associated with counter 7i, the " multiple in-out " counter, are a special set of carry controls
which make a twelve column storage register out of the twelve high order columns of the counter. This
twelve column counter is complete with end around carry, can be independently reset and does not in
any way interfere with the normal twenty-four column functioning of counter 71, As shown in Fig. 2, the
multiple in-out counter has extra in- and out-relays which connect the upper twelve columns of the
counter to either the upper or the lower twelve columns of the buss, Mathematically, this isthe equiva—-

lent of multiplying by 1 or 1912 when numbers are read into the counter and by 1 or 10-12 when
19

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FROM FIG. 1 BUSS COLS. 1-12 TO FIG. 3
ae BUSS COLS. 13-24 Lf
OUT IN

? RELAYS RELAYS 7 4
f _|
GOLS. 13-24 fy 4 COLS. 1-12
LL
6 STORAGE
MULTIPLE -IN- QUT COUNTER COUNTER
INVERT
(COUNTER 71) RELAY
DIRECT INVERTED
READ- OUT READ-OUT
CAM CAM
CONTACTS CONTACTS
FROM FIG. 1 TO FIG. 3
* 50 VOLT D.C. :
Figure 2

numbers are read out of the counter depending upon the operational codes employed, (See Chapter IV,

Coding, Multiple In-Out Counter.) In all problems requiring less than twelve significant digits for

computation, the transfer of numbers through counter 71 permits the storage of two quantities in each

of the seventy-two storage counters, thus doubling the storage capacity of the machine, The function

of the multiple in- out counter is most valuable in statistical computation where the quantities dealt

with are large in number and of low accuracy.
20

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Just as the multiple in-out counter doubles the storage capacity of the calculator at the expense
of accuracy, so do the "ganged counters", 68 and 69, double the accuracy of the machine at the ex-
pense of storage capacity. Counters 68 and 69 are equipped with special carry controls such that they
function as a single storage register consisting of forty-six columns and the algebraic sign which is
repeated in the twocomponent counters. Since this feature has been proved to be of considerable value
in high accuracy computation, counters 64 and 65 have likewise been ganged together. Needlessto say,
the inclusion of the special carry controls on counters 64, 65, 68 and 69 do not interfere with their nor-
mal functions, Two lines of coding are required to make a single forty-six column addition, since the
two parts of the number must be added successively. An 8 prefixed to the ordinary read-in codes of .
the ganged counters picks up the special carry controls, The addition of A+ B, a forty-six column
quantity lying in counters 35, 34, codes 621, 62, to C+ D, standing in counters 69, 68,codes 731, 73,

is coded as:

OUT IN MISC.

Add A+ Bto C + D with special carry controls. 621 8731 7

62 873 7

The most important of the specialized storage registers is the automatic check counter, 72,
Mathematically all checks may be reduced to determining that a given quantity c is less in absolute
magnitude than a selected positive tolerance, t; i.e., that t - |c|>0. The use of the check counter is
based upon the notion that this inequality will be evaluated in counter 72, Obviously, an end around
carry will occur when -|c| is added to t, if and only if the inequality hoids. The coding for the check

procedure is:

OUT IN MISC,

Check the quantity in ctr. C against the positive T 14 q
tolerance in sw, or ctr. T.
Cc 14 71
64

where the code 64 is an automatic continue operation code if and only if an end around carry takes
place in the check counter, If t - |c| £0, no end around carry will take place, the machine will receive

no command to continue operation and will therefore stop.
X Storage Counter Relays
ag
terre
tn
tase |

XI Multiply-Divide and Functional Counters
21

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

»FROM FIG 2 BUSS TO FIG. 4
Sta PLUG BOARD
[omeome)
000) p-ouT | | IN
[ RELAY -—— RELAY
t a)
P-OUT RELAY UNIT
t
READ-OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
_ FROM FIG. 2 | TO FIG. 4.
= 50 VOLT D.C. is
Figure 3

The registers given over to multiplication and division are shown in Plate XI, While the counter
wheels and allied controls involved in these two operations are electrically interconnected, in such a
way that both multiplication and division cannot be carried on at the same time, the basic mode of
operation is better explained in terms of two Separate schematic diagrams, Figs. 3 and 4, In the case
of multiplication, the multiplicand and the multiplier are read into the unit through in-relays connected
to the buss as in the case of the storage counters, The out-relay, however, through which the product
is read out of the multiply unit, connects to the buss through a plugboard provided to fix the decimal
point relation between the product counter and the buss,

The location of the decimal point is of no importance as far as the operation of the storage
counters is concerned. When the operating decimal point is assumed to lie between columns n and
n+ 1 in the switches and storage counters, the corresponding decimal point in the product counter
will lie between columns 2n and 2n+ 1. Clearly, the product counter must contain forty-six columns

and the algebraic sign. Since only twenty-three of these columns and the algebraic sign may normally
22

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

be read out into the buss, it is the purpose of the plugboard, previously mentioned, to make a suitable
selection of the columns to be read out based upon the location of the operating decimal point. The
plugging must be manually adjusted before the machine is placed in operation.

Since the coding for multiplication must select the multiplicand and multiplier and deliver the

product, it consists of three lines:

OUT IN MISC.

Multiply x in ctr, 56, code 654, by y in ctr, 18, code 52, 654 T61
and deliver the product xy to ctr. 13, code 431.

52

431 7

There are no 7's in the Miscellaneous column of the lines of coding selecting the multiplicand and
multiplier and delivering them to the multiply unit. These are omitted because the code B 761, the
multiply code, is an automatic continue operation code and therefore replaces the T's. No longer
does each line of coding correspond to a single operation of the machine, The first line of coding de-
livers the multiplicand to the multiply unit, and turns over control of the calculator to a subsidiary
sequence controi within the multiply unit itself, The unit builds up and stores a multiplication table
consisting of the nine integer multiples of the multiplicand. The multiply unit then signals the sequence
control and calls for the multiplier, The process of multiplication is completed, within the unit, by
withdrawing such multiples of the multiplicand as may be indicated by the multiplier and adding them
together while shifting them to the proper columnar position. Upon completion of this summation,
control of the machine is turned back to the main sequence mechanism and the product delivered as
indicated by the third line of multiply coding.

In the event that one or both of the factors involved in a multiplication are negative numbers,
this fact is sensed and stored by the multiply unit, The factors are then treated as positive absolute
magnitudes for use in the multiplication, Finally the proper algebraic sign is appended to the product
and it is read out directly or inverted as required.

The buss is used during the multiplying operation only three times. If properly timed, other
operations involving the buss but not involving either multiplication or division may be carried on

during multiplication, Such operations are known as " interposed operations" and are considered in
23

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

detail under Multiplication in Chapter IV, Note that division as well as multiplication is excluded be-
cause, as previously mentioned, these operations are electrically interconnected.

When the operating decimal point of the calculator is assumed to lie between columns twenty-
three and twenty-four, the corresponding decimal point in the product counter will fall between column
forty-six and the algebraic sign, For this case, the multiply unit is equipped with a special out-relay
permitting the read-out of columns one through twenty-three of the product counter to the buss. The
normal multiplying operation, with suitable plugging, delivers columns twenty-four through forty-six
of the product counter to columns one through twenty-three of the buss as usual. The use of the special
low order product out-relay in effect provides the machine with forty-six column products as obtained

-from twenty-three column factors. The coding for.this operation is as follows:

OUT IN MISC.
Multiply x in ctr. 56, code 654, by y in ctr. 18, code 52, 654 761
and deliver forty-six columns of the product xy to ctrs.
69, 68, codes 731, 73. 52
731 q
86 73 7

Note that the line of coding dictating the low order product out must immediately follow the normal
product read-out in order to preserve the algebraic sign and deliver it to both counters receiving the
product.

One of the two pairs of ganged counters may be used in combination with this special product
read-out to build up the product of two quantities, either or both of which may consist of forty-six or
fewer digits. The error in such a multiplication will be less than or equal to 2.7 x 10°46, Thus if the
quantity stored across counters A and B is multiplied by the quantity stored across counters C and D,
three multiplications, Ax C, Ax D, B x C, will be performed and the products summed in the ganged
counters, The product B x D is neglected since it is below the capacity of the machine. Examples of
the coding of such multiplications will be found under High Accuracy Computation in Chapter IV.

Although the organization ofthe multiply unit is far more complex than that of the storage counters,
it is nevertheless possible to alter the multiplying circuits to permit special operations, For example,

itis sometimes required to print a function having a very wide range of values, In this case, it is
24

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

convenient to print a fixed number of significant figures together with an associated power often. The -
“normalizing register", in conjunction with the multiply unit, accomplishes this purpose by shifting a
quantity so that its first significant digit appears in column twenty-three and recording the amount of
the shift. The amount of shift combined in a storage counter with a constant dependent upon the
position of the operating decimal point supplies the exponent required, Further examples of special
controls associated with the multiply unit will be described later in connection with the discussion of

the electro-mechanical tables of the elementary transcendental functions,

FROM FIG. 3 BUSS TO FIG.5

val

OUT | iN

RELAY PLAGE RELAY
4 iS oO ie} 4
LOW ORDER LIMITATION DIVIDE
OUT RELAY DIVIDE UNIT
a
SWITCH
READ-OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
FROM FIG. 3 TO FIG.5
Ft 50 VOLT D.C.
Figure 4

Division like multiplication requires three lines of coding. These read the divisor and dividend
into the divide unit and deliver the quotient to its specified destination using the connections shown

diagrammatically in Fig, 4.
25

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

OUT IN MISC.

Divide x in ctr. 3, code 21, by y in ctr. 4, code 3, and 3 76
deliver the quotient to ctr, 5, code 31,

21

31 7

After the divisor and dividend are read into the unit, they are shifted ‘and stored so that their
first significant digits appear in the highest column of the registers in which they are stored. The
number of columns that the dividend was shifted and the complement on nine of the number of columns
the divisor was shifted are added together in the " Q-shift" counter. A constant dependent upon the
position of the operating decimal point is supplied to the Q-shift counter by a manually preset switch
known as the divide switch. Since the Q-shift counter is not equipped with an end around carry circuit,
the addition of a one in the units column compietes the determination of the number of columns the
quotient must be shifted when it is read out into the buss in proper decimal position. A one added into
the units column of a counter to compensate for a missing end around carry is commonly known as an
"elusive one",

As soon as the divisor is delivered and control of the calculator turned over to the divide unit,
a table of the nine integer multiples of the divisor is built up and stored within the unit. When called
upon, the main sequence mechanism delivers the dividend, Under the subsidiary sequence control, the
multiples of the divisor are compared with the dividend and the largest multiple less than the dividend
selected. This multiple is then subtracted from the dividend while the digit defining it is entered in
the quotient counter. The process of division is continued in this manner, successively comparing,
subtracting and shifting to the right. Since the successive subtractions involve different columnar
positions of the dividend counter, an end around carry cannot be provided. The subtractions are ac-
complished by means of complements on nine together with elusive ones introduced into the units
column of each succeeding subtrahend, As the subtractions move to the right, ones appear on the left
since the multiples of the divisor consist of at most twenty-four columns and do not have sufficient
nines to the left to fill the dividend counter, However, when the digits of the remainders are selected
for comparison the extra ones are omitted. Assuming a six column machine, the subtractions appear

as follows:
26

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

213109 213109

re
27400 _/ 58392000000 214_/ 58

45199
03591000000 ; - 548
1
03592000000 359
972599
00851900000 - 274:
—_1
00852000000 852
917799

10029990000 - 82

1
10030000000 300

2

to

972599
11002599000 - 27

ny

1
11002600000
753399
11010133990 - 2466
1

fez)

00

11010134000 134

If, upon comparison, the calculator finds that all multiples of the divisor are greater than the dividend
or the remainder under consideration, a zero or "no-go" is entered in the quotient counter and a new
comparison made one column to the right, When the division is terminated, the dividend counter wili
contain a series of ones and zeros and the last remainder.

Division may be terminated after any desired number of comparisons, by the place limitation
plugging and coding discussed under Division in Chapter IV. The number of significant digits in the

quotient will be either equal to thenumber of comparisons made or to this number less one (if the first

mechanism it may be varied as desired within any given problem,

The quotient is read out into the buss through that part of the out-relay selected by the quantity
standing in the Q-shift counter, If a negative number is shifted to the right, the out-relay also supplies
the nines at the left required to complete the complement on nine of the quotient. The algebraic sign is
determined by the methods employed in the case of multiplication.

Further, as in multiplication, the buss is used only three times during division, and is otherwise
free for any interposed operations not involving either multiplication or division, It should now be

clear that many of the electro-mechanical operations necessary to multiplication and division are
27

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

identical. Indeed the calculator as constructed uses the same registers for both operations, These,
however, are controlled by two separate subsidiary sequence control systems, one for multiplication,
and one for division, |

Though it is not immediately evident, division consumes almost four times as many cycles of
machine time as does multiplication and uses a great deal more apparatus. Clearly, then, this process
isto be avoided whenever possible. Fortunately, an iterative process based onthe Newton Raphson rule,

X41 7%, 7 H&A), n= 0, 1,2, ... (1)
is available for finding reciprocals, Let
f(x) = N - 1/x, (2)
Then Xue = x, (2 - Nx,), (3)
defines a sequence, Ky which converges towards the reciprocal of N. Each succeeding application
of the iterative process roughly squares the error of the last preceding approximation,

Suppose that in a given computation the values of the independent variable increase in an arith-
metic sequence, Under these circumstances, the reciprocal of the nth value of the variable will furnish
a good first approximation to the reciprocal of the (n+ 1)st value, Thus the process of division may
be avoided with a considerable gain in the speed of computation, The application of equation (3) to the
design of calculating machinery was first suggested by Aiken in 1938.9

Equation (3) also provides the calculator with a means of dividing to an accuracy of forty-six
significant digits, The technique by which this is accomplished together with the techniques for ad-
dition, subtraction and multiplication, to the same accuracy, are described in the section on High
Accuracy Computation in Chapter IV.

The Newton Raphson rule, by proper choice of f(x), may be made to yield an iterative process
for obtaining any fractional power of a given number solong as a suitable first approximation is avail-
able, This fact greatly extends the usefulness and speed of operation of the calculator without the
inclusion of a single special electrical circuit. |

On the other hand, the computation of the elementary transcendental functions may not be dis-
posed of so easily, These require special registers as shown at the right of Plate XI, and make use

of the second panel of relays extending to the rear of the calculator.
28

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FROM FIG. 4 BUSS TO FIG.6

PLUG BOARD
OUT (7 IN
RELAY RELAY
t LOGARITHM +t
UNIT
LOG
MULTIPLY TABLE SG)
DIVIDE RELAYS
UNIT SWITCH
T
READ-OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
FROM FIG. 4 j TO FIG. 6.
_* 50 VOLT D.C. _
Figure 5

The method of computation of logarithms (Fig. 5) within the calculator depends upon two equations,
log (arbec...) = log a+ log b+ loge + os, (4)
and
log,(1 +h) = h-n?/2+ n2/3- 4/44 4 (-1tt ats (5)
for h2 <1, The logarithm unit includes two counters known as the logarithm counter and the logarithm
in-out counter, together with a subsidiary sequence control which governs these counters in conjunction
with the multiply-divide unit, If it is desired to compute log, o* ,the coding in the main sequence con-

trol tape will read as follows:

OUT IN MISC.

x lies in ctr, 39, code 6321, deliver log, o* to ctr, 8, 6321 762
code 4,

763

29

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

At the same time that x is read into the logarithm in-out counter, the code B 762 signals the logarithm
subsidiary sequence control to take over the direction of the calculator, From the logarithm in-out
counter, x is read to the logarithm counter so shifted that the first significant digit of x appears in
the twenty-third column of the logarithm counter, The amount of the shiftis recorded and its comple-
ment on ten entered in columns twenty-two, twenty-three and twenty-four of the logarithm in-out
counter, in which the decimal point is now considered to lie between columns twenty-one and twenty-
two, The computation of the characteristic of x is then completed by adding 22 - n intothe logarithm
in-out counter, the operating decimal point being between columns n and n+ 1, This quantity is sup-
plied by a manually preset constant register known as the logarithm switch, For example, if the
operating decimal point lies between columns fifteen and sixteen and x = 783,54210 50928 67954, x is
shifted five columns to the left on reading from the logarithm in-out counter to the logarithm counter .
In this case, 22 - n = 7. Hence, the characteristic of x is computed as 995 + 007 = 002.

Now x = 7.83542 10509 28679 54 stands in the logarithm counter with the decimal point follow-
ing its first significant digit, and it is only necessary to compute the mantissa of logy ox . This compu-
tation is perhaps best explained by a numerical example, Four successive divisions are performed:

X/7 = 1.11934 58644 18382 79142 85 ;
x/(7)(1.1) = 1.01758 71494 71257 08311 68 ;
X/(7)(1.1)(1.01) = 1.00751 20291 79462 45853 14 ;
X/(7)(1.1)(1.01)(1.007) = 1.00050 84698 90230 84263 30 .
‘Equation (4) becomes
log 7.83542 10509 28679 54 = log 7 + log 1.1 + log 1.01 + log 1.007
+ log 1.00050 84698 90230 84263 30 . (6)

The logarithm table relays store log, N accurate to twenty-one decimal places, for N equal to:

1.0 1.1 1,01 1,001
2.0 12 1,02 1,002
3.0 1.3 1,03 1,003
4.0 14 1.04 1,004
5.0 15 1.05 1,005
6.0 1.6 1.06 1,006
7.0 17 1,07 1,007
8.0 18 1,08 1.008
9.0 1.9 1.09 1.009 .
30

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

The internal logarithm sequence controls select the four logarithms called for by the first four terms
on the right side of equation (6) and deliver them to the logarithm in-out counter for summation.

The last term of the logarithmic sum in equation (6) is of the form log (1+ a 1074) where a <10,
Writing (142104) = 14h,
then h<1073,

In using equation (5), six terms of the series are employed. Therefore, the remainder of the series
will be

R< h'(1 + 7h/8 + 7h2/9 + Th2/10 + ...)/7

Reh (1eheheshes )/7,

R<h'/7(1-h),

R< 10721/7(0.999) .
Clearly, the choice of four divisions and six terms of the series puts the error below the lower limit
of the capacity of the machine. The series given in equation (5) is used by the machine in the form

log, )(1 +h) = (((( (he, + c.)h + c,)R + C,)h + Co)h + c,)h :
where c, = M, Cy = -M/2, Cg = M/3, Cy = -M/4, Cp = M/5, fg = -M/6;
M = 10g 9& .

The values of the c's are alsostored in relays and supplied to the multiply unit as directed by the loga-
rithm sequence controls, One feature of these controls, not previously mentioned in this discussion,
permits the multiplicand, h, and its multiples to remain stored in the multiply-divide unit throughout
the evaluation of the series, This saves a considerable amount of machine time,

After summing all terms of equation (6)in the logarithm in-out counter, log, ox is read out into
the buss through plugging since it stands with its decimal point between columns twenty-one and twenty-
two and must be shifted to conform with the operating decimal position.

The exponential function, or anti-logarithm, is derived by areversal of the process used to com-
pute logarithms. The method of computation is dependent upon the equations

10% = 19!0a+b,1 9/10, 94/100; 9/1000.) of (7)
tof = eh eta hs here h aie, (8)

where h = f log,10.
31

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FROM FIG. 5 BUSS TO FIGT
DOO PLUG BOARD . PLUG BOARD GWeNs)
looo . one)
lomene) OUT [-——— IN o00

RELAY RELAY |
tL E10 COUNTER 4
| R | EXPONENTIAL
MULTIPLY UNIT
DIVIDE
UNIT
TABLE RELAYS |

READ- OUT
CAM
CONTACTS .
_FROM FIG. 5 TO FIG.7
= 50 VOLT D.C. _
Figure 6

The exponential unit (Fig. 6) includes the exponential in-out counter and a subsidiary sequence
control governing this counter in connection with the multiply-divide unit. In order to compute 10°,

the main sequence control tape must read as follows:

OUT IN MISC.

x lies in ctr, 27, code 5421; deliver 10* to ctr. 20, code 53, | 5421 7621

741

832 53

731

The code B 7621 signals the exponential sequence control to take over command of the calculator,
Simultaneously, x is read to the exponential in-out counter via the multiply unit, exponential-in plug-
ging and certain transformation circuits, which accomplish two purposes. First, a zero or nine is

read into the twenty-fourth column of the exponential in-out counter according as x is positive or
32

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

negative; second, the absolute value of x is read inte the exponential in-out counter so shifted that the
decimal point lies between columns twenty-one and twenty-two. Thus x stands in the exponential in-
out counter in the form:
column 24 23 #22 24 20 19 ~= 18-1
digit t a b.oc d e€ f
Columns one through eighteen of x are then multiplied by log,10 and delivered to the multiply
unit for expansion in the series (8). The coefficients are stored in relays and sent to the multiply unit
as required. Again the multiplicand, h, is held constant while expanding the series in order to con-
serve machine time. Since h< 2,3 x 1073, the remainder of the series will be
R=hiyits nb ara hore oy
R<h(14h/8+h2/8-9+ ..)/7 ,
R<h(1+h+h?+h?4 ...)/7 ,
R<h'sTi(1-h),
R < (2.3)? x 1072! 7: (0,997) ,
R< io-#! ,
Clearly, the use of seven terms of the series leaves a remainder which is below the capacity of
the machine.

The quantities ,

190-1 190-01 190-001
1082 590-02 590-002
190-3 190-03 190-003

0.4 0.04 0.004
100° 10 100-004
190-3 1190.05 590.005

0.6 70.06 10.006
190. 190.07 130.007
100.8 190-08 590-008 .
100-2 190-09 190.009 ,

are stored in table relays accurate to twenty-one decimal places. The proper values are called for by
columns nineteen, twenty and twenty-one of x as it stands in the exponential in-out counter so that the
product, p = 100/104 99/100, 92/1000 of

may be formed.
33

_DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

This product, P, will stand in the product counter with its decimal point between columns forty-
two and forty-three, If x is a positive quantity, the product is read out to a forty-five column plug-
_ board in which the decimal point is assumed to lie between columns twenty-one and twenty-two. This
read-out is accomplished through a multiple out-relay, the proper part of which is selected by the
quantity 10a + b standing in columns twenty-two and twenty-three of the exponential in-out counter.
From the plugboard, the product passes to the buss at the operating decimal position through manually
preset plugwires connecting the plugboard to the buss in proper columnar relation, and thence to the
storage register indicated by the third line of exponential coding.

If x is a negative quantity, the reciprocal of the product, P » is obtained by the divide unit as
ordered by the exponential sequence control, The reciprocal is then read out of the quotient counter
to the storage register by circuits equivalent to those employed in the case in which x is positive.

The third electro-mechanical table contained within the calculator is that of the function, sin x.

The method of computing sin x is based upon the equations:

sin (- x) = - sin x ; (9)
sin (x + 2n7) = sin x; (10)
sin x = cos (7/2 - x); (11)

sin x = x - x9/354+ x9/5)-x"/TL +...

4 (- 121 ans 1b + oe, n= 1,2, 3, ss, 10 5 (12)
cos x= 1 - x72! + x4 4) - x® 76! + see
+(- 1)°x2" an)! tee, n= 1, 2, 3, ..., 10. (13)

Since the series (12) and (13) are alternating series the remainder, R, will be less than the first term
omitted. Assuming x < 7/4,
IR| < (1/4)? om,
Taking the logarithm of both sides of the inequality,
10g 49 IR| < 22(log, 9 7 - 108494) - log, 9(22")
< 22(0.498 - 0.602) - 21.050<-23 .
Thus |R| < 10723 and the error in using these series for computation falls below the capacity of the

calculator.
34
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

_FROM FIG. 6 BUSS ; To FIG. 8
l PLUG BOARD | |
BOO PLUG BOARDS eM) S00
000 ooo 000
IN 000 oo°0

900} OUT J
RELAY RELAY
a aie
SINE

MULTIPLY UNIT
DIVIDE
UNIT

Vow RELAY

TABLE RELAYS |

. |
READ-OUT
CAM
_FROM FIG. 6 CONTACTS TO FIG. 8

+ 50 VOLT D.C. °

7

Figure 7

The sine unit (Fig. 7) is composed of the sine in-out counter and subsidiary sequence circuits
having control of this counter, the multiply unit and certain table relays providing the coefficients of
the series together with other necessary constants such as 7 /4, 7/2, tr and 27 . The main

sequence control tape dictates the computation of sin x by the coding:

OUT IN MISC.

x lies in ctr. 14, code 432; deliver sin x to ctr. 40, 432 7631
code 64.
84 64 7

7321

In order to compute sin x, it must first be determined in which quadrant x falls, The first

operation in the sine sequence multiplies x by 1/27 (supplied by a relay through plugging) at the
operating decimal position. Then the product |x| /2 7 is read into columns one through twenty-three

of the sine in-out counter with decimal point at the operating position, At the same time, the algebraic
35

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

sign of x is read into the twenty-fourth column of the sine in-out counter. Let |x| /27 indicate
|x| /27 with its integral part omitted. This integral part represents multiples of 27 which may be
dropped by virtue of equation (10). Through plugging, [| fer is next read from the sine in-out
counter to the multiplicand counter so shifted that its decimal point lies between columns twenty-two
and twenty-three. The algebraic sign of x remains stored in the sine in-out counter. The integer
four, supplied by a table relay, is read to the multiplier counter. The resulting product is read into
the sine in-out counter with its decimal point between columns twenty-two and twenty-three, Four

cases may now be distinguished:

(a) 0<2|x|/7< 1, |x|in quadrant 1, sin|x|>0;
(B) 1 <2|x|/7 <2, |x| in quadrant I, sin|x|> 0;
(%) 2<2[x|/ < 3, |x|in quadrant MI, sin|x|< 0;

(§) 3 <2[x|/m <4, |x]in quadrant IV, sin|x|<0.

Which of these four cases appertain in the case of a specific value of x may be determined by sensing
the integer in the twenty-third column of the sine in-out counter, The value of this integer together
with the algebraic sign of x previously stored in the twenty-fourth column of the sine in-out counter
complete the determination of the sign of sin x.
| The procedure by which this is accomplished and by which x is reduced to a first quadrant angle
will now be discussed, The quantity 2 |x| /w is multiplied by 77/2 and when this operation is com-
pleted, the product, |x| , is read into the sine in-out counter. During this multiplication, the sensing
circuits on column twenty-three of the sine in-out counter order the following operations:
(1) Reset all columns but the twenty-fourth of the sine in-out counter;
(2) Case (a): O<|x| <7
|x| is read into the sine in-out counter directly;
Case (8): 7/2<|x|< 7
iz] is inverted when read into the sine in-out counter,

tT is added into the sine in-out counter;
36
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Case (¥): m < [x| <3 7/2
|x| is read into the sine in-out counter directly,
- 7 is added into the sine in-out counter, .
a nine is added into the twenty-fourth column of the sine in-out counter;
Case ($): 3 7/2 <|x| < 27
|x| is inverted when read into the sine in-out counter,
27 is added into the sine in-out counter,
a nine is added into the twenty-fourth column of the sine in-out counter,
Since the sine in-out counter has no end around carry, and since any digit other than a nine in the
twenty-fourth column of this counter is the equivalent of a zero, the final algebraic sign of sin x now
stands in the twenty-fourth column of the sine in-out counter, The reduced first quadrant angle, X,
corresponding to the given value of x stands in the remaining columns.
Two cases remain to be distinguished:
(a) 0O< X < 7/4;

(bo) r/AsX< 7/2.

FROM FIG. 7 BUSS TOFIG.9
° 1 >
PLUG BOARD
loa eme)
ooo
Oooo] OUT IN

| RELAY | RELAY |
t | ;
LiO COUNTER

READ-OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
FROM FIG. 7 j TO Fis. 9

+ 50 VOLT D.C.

—>-

|

Figure 8
37

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

After a sensing circuit has compared the value of X with 7/4, in case (a), the computation proceeds
by evaluating the series (12). In case (b), 7/2 - X is formed and the series (13) is evaluated. In
either case, the result of the summation of the series is delivered to the sine in-out counter, columns
one through twenty-three, with the result that this counter then contains | sin x| and the appropriate
algebraic sign.

The read-out of sin x to the buss for delivery to storage is through plugging, in order to shift
the function to conform to the operating decimal position. The read-out is direct or inverted accord-
ing as zero or eight on the one hand, or a nine on the other hand, stands in the twenty-fourth column
of the sine in-out counter.

The logarithm in-out counter and the sine in-out counter are commonly usedas "shift counters".
These counters are equipped with pluggable and direct read-ins and read-outs as shown in Figs.8 and
9, They may be used to multiply or divide by powers of ten. In addition, the pluggable read-outs may

be manually so adjusted as to permit selective read-out of the shift counters by means of which any

_ FROM FIG. 8 BUSS TO FIG. 10
| | PLUG BOARD .- |
O00] fooo ‘fooo
coool jooo OUT 000
000] looo RELAYS | IN 000
, t. RELAYS
ee SIO COUNTER AS,
BOARD }__,_
Ly
tt. | J —_
t
READ- OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
__ FROM FIG. 8 TOFIG. 10

* 50 VOLT D.C.

ee

Figure 9
38

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

m columns may be delivered to the buss while the remaining 24 - m are suppressed. This selective
read-out does not erase any part of the number standing in the shift counter, The read-ins and read-
outs of these two counters have been placed under control of the main sequence mechanism by codes
which are independent of the codes of the functional units of which the shift counters are themselves
a part, Since the logarithm in-out and sine in-out counters do not have complete carry circuits at
all times, and have codes and resets which differ materially from those of other registers, they must
be used with care. A detailed discussion of these codes and their uses will be found in Chapter IV.

With the aid of the electro-mechanical tables of log, 9% > 10* and sin x, all of the elementary
transcendental functions, including the hyperbolic functions, may be obtained through the use of the
operations of the calculator already described. Inorder to provide for inverse trigonometric functions,
higher transcendental functions and empirical functions defined by tabular data, the calculator is
equipped with three mechanical interpolators.

The three interpolator mechanisms and their accompanying switches are shown in Plate XII, to
the left of the main sequence mechanism. The three units share in common the interpolation counter
and the interpolation check counter, (Fig. 10). A function is introduced into an interpolation mechanism
in the form of a perforated paper tape, (Plate XIII). This tape is similar to the main sequence control
tape, but in place of commands to the calculator, contains coded successive equidistant values of the
argument, each accompanied by the necessary interpolation coefficients. Any order of interpolation
up to and including the eleventh may be employed.

a? 4.

The coding for interpolation by unit Ias it appears in the main sequence control tape is:

OUT IN MISC.
x lies in ctr. 50, code 652; a tape containing f(x) is on 652 7654
Interpolator I; determine f(x) and deliver it to ctr. 5i,
code 6521, 62
841
; 652 763
6521 13
7

There are a very great many possible variations in this coding as well as in the possible uses of the
AAAAA

wwdwea

AAAAAAAAA

oe td

O

XII Sequence Control Mechanism and Interpolators
eeoeeeneee
eevee
GO seceeeeeene

XIII = Interpolator
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FROM FIG. 9 BUSS TO FIG.
| f
SOG [OGG PLUG BOARDS . PLUG BOARDS ta (sao
Oo0o°o 000 , O00 o0°0
[ozeme) OOo} OUT IN Oo00 jeokexe)
RELAY RELAY J
INTERPOLATION
COMPUTING CIRCUITS
MULTIPLY | "qa"
DIVIDE o* sw. O
UNIT
INTERPOLATOR
MECHANISM
| FORWARD CLUTCH
_ OUT { REVERSE CLUTCH |
__RELAY i=
ss | TAPE SENSING PINS |
INTERPOLATION = [|_|
POSITIONING CIRCUITS
u u IN
[interP. ctr | "4/2" WO] pei py
[INTERP. CK. cTR] “c" sw. -—+t
CAM READ - OUT
CONTACTS CAM
CONTACTS
— |
7 50 VOLT D.C.

Figure 10
40

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

interpolator units. All ofthose which have been developed up to the present time are included in Chap-
ter IV. The present discussion will be confined to the most elementary case, that of interpolation by
means of Taylor's series.

A function f(x) is to be determined. The independent variable, x, is considered as consisting
of two parts, x = a +h, where a is an integral multiple of a power of ten. Since four columns are
provided for containing the value of a, it is clear that a functional tape may contain 104 arguments.

An interpolation is performed by evaluating the series,

f(x) = f(a +h)

f(a) + f'(a)h + f"(a)h2/24 4... | (14)

u

Cy + ch + cgh* + egh3 + sees
in the form,
f(x) = f(a+h) = (((( vee + C,)b + c,)h + c,)h + c,)h+ Cy . (15)

The interpolation process may be divided into two distinct parts, The first consists of position~
ing the functional tape and the second of the computation necessary to the interpolation itself. For
tape positioning, the argument, a, and the highest order column of h are delivered to the interpolation
counter, The interpolator mechanism first reads the tape to discover the position at which the tape is
standing. By subtraction in the interpolation counter, the number of arguments the mechanism must
pass over in order to arrive at the required argument is determined, To accomplish tape positioning
in the shortest possible time, functional tapes are made endless. Suitable sensing circuits aided by
manually preset switches direct the mechanism to move the tape in the direction of shorter travel.
The highest order column of h is combined with a half-correction in the interpolation counter to in-
sure positioning to the nearest argument, As the tape steps, the number of arguments to be covered
- (stored in the interpolation counter) is reduced one for each argument passed and is finally reduced
to zero.

At the beginning of the positioning operation the required argument, a, is read inte the interpo-
lation check counter. At the end of the positioning operation it is transferred to the interpolation
counter and used to check the position of the tape. If the tape is not in proper position because an im-

possible argument has been sent to the interpolation unit or because of faulty mechanical operation,
41

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

the positioning mechanism will try 2 second time to find the required argument. The calculator is
stopped and a red light turned on in the event that the positioning mechanism fails on this second try.

However, if the tape is found to be in the required position, the interpolation sequence control
takes over command of the calculator. The quantity x is again read out of storage into the buss and
the h part delivered by plugging to the multiply unit, Suitable corrections of h, such as nines to the
left if h is negative, are also made by plugging.

The interpolation sequence control then evaluates series (15), while the multiplicand, h, is held
constant as usual to conserve machine time. The coefficients, Cyr Cpiy? oe Cy, Cgsare read out of
the functional tape and added into the multiplier counter under control of the interpolation sequence
circuits.

When a relatively large number of values, such as constants or random values of a variable,
are to be used by the calculator, and further when these values are to be used in a prescribed order,
they may be supplied to the machine via one of the interpolator mechanisms and a perforated paper
tape, Such a tape is known as a "value tape" to distinguish it from a functional tape. Mathematically,
the operation of reading from a value tape is the equivalent of zero order interpolation. In order to
increase the flexibility of the interpolators when used in this manner,three sequence codes have been
assigned to each interpolator mechanism, These require that the tape be stepped forward, stepped

back and that the sensing pins read from the tape (Fig..11), as in the following examples for interpo-

lator I.
OUT IN MISC.
Step the tape forward. 753
Step the tape back, 154
Read the value from the tape to ctr. 34, code 62. 85 q
62 7

The codes for accomplishing the same purposes in connection with interpolators II and IMI may be

found in the section on Interpolators in Chapter IV.
42

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

__ FROM FIG. 10 BUSS TO FIG. 12
| PLUG BOARD
oo Ke) OUT
5 ° 5 RELAY
U t__|
| RELAY INTERPOLATOR
VALUE TAPE
t—-— CARD FEED
T
READ- OUT
CAM
CONTACTS
FROM FIG. 10 [ | TO FIG. 12
id 50 VOLT D.C.
Figure 11

Other means of supplying data to the caicuiator are the two card feeds shown in Piate ATV and
Fig. 11, These employ standard tabulating machine cards and have three advantages over the value
tape. First, since tabulating machines are highly standardized, the cards permit the interchange of
data from one computation laboratory to another, Second, the devices required in the manual prepa-
ration of the cards have been developed to a high degree of perfection, Third, the calculator is itself
equipped with a card punching mechanism.

The disadvantage of punched cards as compared to a value tape lies in the fact that the card feeds
must accept the cards in the order in which the deck is stacked. No provision is made for retrieving
a cardonce it has passed through the feed, Hence, a second use of the value punched in a card requires

the intervention of an operator.

The coding for reading from card feed Tis:

OUT IN MISC.

Read the value from the card in feed I to ctr. 3, code 21, 21 7632

When using punched cards and value tapes, the coding must be arranged to synchronize their reading
XIV Typewriters, Card Feeds and Card Punch
XV Tape Punch
43

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR
f

units with the main control tape. This implies that suitable operating instructions must be prepared
to insure that cards and #4lue tapes are properly inserted in the calculator.
;
A control is provided on each card feed to stop the calculator when the cards are exhausted or

jammed. The quantities in the cards are read into the buss through plugging and therefore may be

shifted to conform with the operating decimal position. This is not true, however, of value tapes.

&

Occasivnally aproblem is sovoluminous as to taxthe facilities of the calculator.In such cases,
the main control tapes are so designed that the computation may proceed part way, the intermediate
results may be punched into cards and the cards later fed into the calculator for further computation
under the direction of a second main control tape.

The card feeds and interpolator mechanisms together with the switches previously described
represent the means by which numbers may be introduced into the calculator as a basis for compu-
tation. For recording computed results, two methods are available, the card punch mentioned in the
previous paragraph and two automatic typewriters, (Plate XV).

The printing and punching of numbers is accomplished with the aid of registers known as the
"print" and "punch" counters together with special circuits designed to control the recording devices. |
The print and punch counters (Fig. 12) are equipped with in- and out-relays and complete carry ,
circuits so that they may function as standard storage counters in addition to performing their special
purposes.

The coding for the printing operation consists of two lines, one line to read the quantity to be

printed to the print counter and one to initiate the printing operation,

OUT IN MISC.

x lies in ctr, 18, code 52; print x on typewriter I. 52 7432

752 7

The controls of the typewriters are very flexible with respect to the number of digits printed,
their spacing, columnar position and line spacing, These controls are considered in detail under Print-
ing in Chapters IV and V, The computed results may be reproduced photographically directly from the
typewritten sheets. This avoids the possibility of error due to copying, inherent in most compu-

tational procedures,
44
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FROM FIG. #1 BUSS TO FiG. i
QUT IN OUT IN
RELAYS Ty RELAYS RELAYS 7 RELAYS
t $ t an |
PUNCH PRINT
; COUNTER ; COUNTER
lomeome) fomeme)
000 oo0
ooo Coo°0
PLUG i PLUG |
BOARD PUNGH BoARD | TYPEWRITER
READ-OUT
GAM
CONTACTS
FROM FIG. il | TO FIG. 1
+ 50 VOLT 0.6.

Figure 12

The punch coding also consists of two lines, one line to read into the punch counter and one to

initiate the punching operation.

OuT IN MISC,

x lies in ctr. 37, code 631; punch x into a card, 631 153
. 75

In order to avoid the loss of computed results, the card punch is equipped with a stop control which
prevents a read-in to the punch counter, stops the calculator and lights a red signal light in the event
that a blank card is not in the proper punching position at the time the sequence control tape dictates
the punching operation.

‘Not all problems imposed on the calculator require the use of punched cards. Hence, a manual

keyboard connected with the punch may be used for the preparation of cards while the calculator is in
45

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

operation, This punch, however, does not produce any of the tapes used by the machine. It wili be

recalled that the Jacquard weavers laced their cards together to provide the tapes they required for

the control of their looms, The calculator, on the other hand, uses smooth tapes prepared by means
_ Of a specially designed manual punch shown in-Plate XV.

Two keyboards are used interchangeably to control this punch. The first of these is used in the
preparation of functional and value tapes. It has twenty-four. columnar positions and perforates the
tape in such a way as to represent any one of the ten digits in each column of a twenty-three figure
number together with the algebraic sign, A four line code is used as shown in Fig. 13. This figure

| must be read from the bottom to the top, representing the forward direction in which the tape passes
through the reading mechanisms of the interpolator units,

In general, a value tape consists of a tabulation of constants punched into the tape in a given order.
A functional tape, in contrast, contains a group of entries associated with each argument. The first
entry in each group is the argument itself. This is followed by the interpolational coefficients, Ch»
Chap? veer Cys Cgp in this order as shown in Fig. 14. .

The argument must be punched in columns fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and eighteen of the tape
regardless of the location of either the tape decimal point or the operating decimal point. The nega-
tive algebraic sign, if required, must be represented by a nine in the twenty-fourth column. Each
argument must be identified by an argument code consisting of a three-four punched in the first
column of argument punching. Fig. 14represents a portion of a tape for fourth order interpolation on
f(x) = tan x with anaccuracy of twelve decimal places. The figure illustrates all of the salient features
of an interpolation tape.

The main control tapes are punched by the second keyboard, previously mentioned, which ap-
pears in Plate XV. It is designed to contain two lines of coding which must be punched simultaneously.
This is necessary because the sequence and interpolator mechanisms, though radically different in
operation, are in reality made of the same mechanical components. One numerical value in a functional
tape occupies the same amount of space as two lines of control tape coding. The device of setting up
two lines of control tape coding per punching operation makes it possible to punch sequence control

tapes and functional tapes with one and the same manual punch.
46

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

A
VY VV

e000 060080 086000000
eee

eee seseeeesces
eee
eececece
08000000000008

ecooeoedvvneoveoeoeoewoeonmoevneowensonsoeoenvenee 080806 0 6

A
WV WW

VALUE TAPE

Negative Argument <-51
Argument Code in lst col.

Positive Argument 51
Argument Code in lst col.

Negative Number
698 321 576 438 499 013 451

Positive Number
521 328 794 532 605 972 100 28

Diagonal Number

012 345 678 901 234 567 890 123
© 000 111 222 333 999 999 999 99
O 999 000 11] 222 888 Bas Aas 8s
0 888 999 000 111.777 777 777 77
0 TTT 888 999 C00 666 666 666 66
0 666 777 888 999 555 555 555 55
0 555 666 777 888 Lib lols lets ble
O Lub 555 666 777 333 333 333 33
O 333 bhh 555 666 222 222 222 22

O 222 333 Ahh 555 DLL IM mn

0 111 222 333 44k 000 000 000 00

Figure 13
DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

FUNCTIONAL TAPE

A
WV

Figure 14

G3 04503 529 133 009
Cy 0.300 O41 586 295
Arg 0.33

Co 0.331 389 405 224
Cy 1.109 818 937 895
Cg 0.367 782 237 736
Cz 0.491 818 782 980
Cy 0.285 577 613 215
Arg 0.32

Co 0.320 327 505 078
C1 1.102 609 710 509
Cg 0.353 196 217 642
Cz 0.480 675 033 370
C, 0.271 705 506 74,0

Arg 0.31
48

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

CONTROL TAPE

OUT IN MISC.
7s 7s 64
20 7h val

| 321 7
32
732 321
321 321 7
321 761 732
321 7
752
21 7432
121 7h 7
31 7
3 21 32
321 321 7
32 762 7
3 32 732
872 3 7
73 32
The 21 7
1 7
| 2 21
2 21 7
1 761 7
2 7
32 32
ThL 1 7
1 761
START 87

e e
e e e e
e e
ee 8 oe e
e
eee @
6 e
ee
e e
e eee : eee
e e
eee eee 6
e e
ase 28 ae oe
e e
eee 6
a j e
ecoie :
e 6
ee 6 eee
eS. . e
e e@ ee 6 e e
e@ e
ee e
e e
e ee ee
e e
ee@e eee 6
@ e
ee ee ee
® eo
e ee e ee
@ Cd]
oe e e 6
@ e
e ee ee
e e
e e686 ee 8
t ] 6
e e
® ®
s es
e . e
e eee
 -] e
e Be e
e OS )
ee e6
e e@
e e e ee
e @
@ a@ e
[ e
ee
e START \ e
WwW

Figure 15

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

CODING SHEET

OPERATION _ LINE OUT IN MISC.
Xp-1 to MC 1 1 761
4x to MP and to ctr. 1; ctr, 1 = x, ThL 1 7
reset ctr. 6 32 32
X,-14 x to ctr. 2 2 7
Xp, to MC 1 761 7
X,.] 4 x to ctr. 3 2 21 7
Xp-] 4x to ctr. 3 2 21
Xp to MP i 7
(Ax)? to ctr. 3 7h2 21 7
1 to ctr. 6 10 743 32
Xn? to ctr. 4; turn on typewriter I 872 3 7
xp" to ctr. 63 ctr. 6=1 - Xn? 3 32 732
1/V1 - x77 to MC 31 761 7
reset ctr. 7 321 321 7
-x,* to ctr. 3 3 “21 32
W/V 1 - x7* to WP 31 7
tolerance to check ctr. Tel Th 7
check to print ctr, I 21 74,32
print on typewriter I 752
Y/(1 - x).32) to ctr. 7 20 321 7
~1/(1 = x)-12) to MC 321 761 732
reset ctr. 7 321 321 7
3 to etr. 7 1432 321
1 - x,” to MP 32
(1 = xn2)/(1 = xp-12) to ctr. 7 321 7
check to check ctr. 21 Th 71
check and reset check ctr, 7h 7h 64

Figure 16

49
50

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

Figure 15 shows a short section of control tape and Fig. 16, the corresponding coding. As in
the case of value and functional tapes, the control tape must be read upwards.

Since the control tapes deal with operations only, they represent the solution of a mathematical
situation independent of the values of the parameters involved. Hence, such control tapes as are of
general application are preserved in the tape library for future use, Functional and value tapes of
general interest are likewise preserved.

When a problem is referred to the Computation Laboratory, the first step in its solution is that
taken by the mathematician who chooses the numerical method best adapted to computation by the cal-
culator, This choice is made on the basis of the accuracy desired, the possible checking operations
and the speed of computation. Such functional, value and control tapes as are required are then com-
puted, coded and punched, Since the mathematician cannot always. be present while the calculator is
running, instructions must be prepared to guide the operating staff. These must include switch settings,
the list of tapes to be used, plugging instructions, manual resets, information concerning checks,
starting, stopping and rerun instructions, The instructions for the plugging of the functional units
are usually given in the form of diagrams similar to those in Chapter V. The manual resets may in-
clude the clearing of both functional and storage counters. On the functional panel, (Plate XI), may
be seen the push-buttons by which all of the functional counters maybe reset except the forty-seventh
or sign column of the product-quotient counter which is reset at the end of each multiplying or di-
viding operation, Above the sequence mechanism are the seventy-two push-buttons which permit
manual resetting of each of the storage counters. Directly below the reset buttons and above the
sequence mechanism, (Plate XII), is a constant register which exactly duplicates one of the sixty
switches. Because this register is frequently used to provide the increment of the independent variable,
it is known as the independent variable switch. Further, because it is located conveniently near the
sequence mechanism, this switch is particularly useful in testing the various units of the calculator.

The start and stop keys are located directly above the sequence mechanism as shown in Plate XII,
The use of these keys and their associated electrical circuits will be discussed in Chapter III.

The main sequence control is equipped to advance the tape, step by step, normally at a rate of

200 steps per minute, unless one of the subsidiary sequence controls is directed by the coding to
51

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

temporarily take over command of the calculator. In this case, the control tape is stopped until the
subsidiary sequence control has finished its operation and signals the main sequence control to con-
tinue operation.

The normal step rate of the sequence tape, then, does not give a good estimate of the speed of
the calculator, This may be better given by citing the time required for various operations, When
computing with twenty-three significant digits and operating decimal point between columns fifteen

sixteen, the maximum operation times are as shown in the following table.

Operation Seconds Cycles
Addition 0.3 1
Subtraction . 0.3 1
Multiplication 6.0 - 20
’ ; Division 11.4 38
Log, ox 68.4 228
10" 61.2 204
Sin x 60.0 199

All of the times cited include the time required to transfer the arguments to the functional units and to
deliver the results for further computation, The time required for all operations, except addition and
subtraction, may be shortened by reducing the accuracy of the computation, Obviously, the only way
to state the relative speed of the calculator is to solve a problem first by manual methods and then by
use of the machine, Such an estimate has been made and apparently the machine is well nigh one
hundred times as fast as a well equipped manual computer. When it is borne in mind that a computer
can work little more than six hours a-day before fatigue causes him to produce a prohibitive number
of errors, it becomes clear that operating on a twenty-four hour schedule, the calculator may produce

as much as six months work in a single day.
52

DESCRIPTION OF THE CALCULATOR

References
E. T. Whittaker and G. Robinson, Calculus of Observations (3rd ed.) (1940), p. 2.
Whittaker and Robinson, loc. cit.
F, Cajori, History of Mathematics (1919), p. 226.
Whittaker and Robinson, op. cit., chap. VII.
Whittaker and Robinson, op. cit., p. 363.
Whittaker and Robinson, op. cit., p. 367.
Whittaker and Robinson, loc, cit.
H.H. Aiken, Proposed Automatic Calculating Machine (1937), p. 18, (privately distributed).

H.#. Aiken, Harvard Lecture Notes on Applied Mathematics (1938), p. 10.
53

CHAPTER IIT
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

"Simplicity is Nature's first step, and the last of Art.”

Philip James Bailey

In the preceding chapter, means were described by which the Automatic Sequence Controlled
Calculator is kept in continuous operation. However, no mention was made of the circuits by which
the machine is started and stopped. This subject may best be approached by consideration of the main
sequence control.

Figures 17 and 18 show the sequencing circuits of a machine having nine reading pins, three in
each of the A, B and C groups, rather than the twenty-four pins of the calculator. The nine reading
pins are numbered 6, 7 and 8 in each group in order that the starting and stopping circuits may be
presented in a manner consistent not only with the diagrams, but also with the calculator itself. The
nine reading pins make available 29 possible orders per line of coding and are sufficient to develop
all the ideas necessary to a clear understanding of the sequence control, An attempt to drawthe actual
circuits employed in the calculator would lead to inconveniently large and complex diagrams,

Figure 17 shows the reading contacts controlled by the reading pins and the tape, neither of the
latter being shown in the figure. Once the pins have advanced against the tape and closed the reading
contacts in positions corresponding tothe holes inthe tape, an electrical circuit is established to ener-
gize the sequence relays, Suppose a line of coding to read (6, 6, 7) corresponding to the reset of
counter 32, code 6, Then beginning at the positive terminal of the generator, assuming the cam con—-
trolled contact FC-101 to be closed and for the moment further assuming that the four-pole read relay
contacts are closed, complete circuits exist through the reading contacts A-6, B-6, C-7, through the
corresponding sequence relays to the negative generator terminal, When the sequence relays are
picked up, each is held in its energized position through one of its owncontacts and the cam controlled
contact FC-102,

The sequence relays are multipolar, and in addition to their hold contacts, have "cascade" con-

tacts wired as shown in Fig.18, These permit the selection of out-, in- and miscellaneous relays
54

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

+50 VOLT D.C.

FG-101 FG-102

READ-1,2,3,4

reapiNe contacts [_l [J

OUT-A IN-B MISC. -C

C-6 C-7 c-8

i SEQUENCE ? RELAYS )

-50 VOLT D.C.

=!

Figure i

which are picked up by means of cam controlled impulses, The multipole relays are of the double
throw variety, having four, six or twelve poles, and may be either single or double coil. They are
jack connected and wired with the aid of piug-in wires as shown in Plate XVI. When a reiay is not
energized, circuits may be completed through its normally closed (NC) contacts. On the other hand,
when a relay is picked up, circuits may be completed through its normally open (NO) contacts, Thus
any code corresponds to a series of normally open and normally closed sequence relay contacts, For
example,as may be seen in Fig.18, the in-relay of counter 32, code 6,is picked up through B-8-1 NC,
B-7-1NC and B-S-1NO, A complete tabulation of the cascade contacts for all of the codes at present
used by the calculator is given in Appendix I,

The contacts of the out-, in- and miscellaneous relays are not shown in Fig. 18 as these are

parts of the circuits to be controlled by these relays rather than of the sequence control circuits,
XVII Storage Counter
55

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

50 VOLT D.C.
FC-CAM-C

FG-CAM-A FC-CAM-B

A-7-2 B-7-1 | B-7-2 C-7-2

A-6-1| A-6-2 | A-6-3] A-6-4 B-6-I | B-6-2 | B-6-3) B-6-4 C-6-i

C-6-2 | C-63] C-6-4

. IN- RELAYS AND SO VOLT 0.6.
OUT - RELAYS SUBSIDIARY SEQUENCE MISCELLANEOUS RELAYS
CONTROLS .
Figure 18
ONE GYCLE

READING PINS ADVANCED es
READING GONTACTS MADE Pe
READ RELAY FC-105 =
SEQUENCE RELAYS FG-IOI, 102 =
OUT-RELAYS FC-A =
IN-RELAYS FG-B =
MISCELLANEOUS RELAYS FC-C =,
CLUTCH MAGNET FG-1I05 =
TAPE MOVES FORWARD —

Figure 19
56

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

FC-i08 1S FO-105 | STOP p
Fy oe on i |

+1

START
“KEY LT nepear

-I START

-|
FG-103 | ,
. L
Qu START STOP
-i,2 STO

G-7-3

. 4 P W
| 4 7 STOP
f r C-8-1 - SWITCH"
b Fok ee td i
| C-7-i 7] REPEAT Z cLutcu | rc
| “4 5 MAGNET
START REPEAT READ STOP
RELAY RELAY RELAY RELAY

Figure 20

These contacts will be considered in connection with the computing circuits of which they form a part.
The timing diagram, Fig.19, together with the foregoing description should make clear the repetitive
operation of the circuits shown in Figs, 17 and 18 insofar as continuous operation of the calculator
is concerned,

Figure 20 and the diagram, Fig. 21, show the start and stop circuits and their timing. The de-
pression of the start key completes the circuit through FC-103 to pick up the start relay, The repeat
relay, one point of which is shuntedacross the start key, is controlled by the sequence relay, C-7, This
is picked up by the continue operations code, Miscellaneous 7, The transfer of the contacts of the start
relay closes the circuit, controlled by FC-105, to the read relay and the clutch magnet, This circuit
contains two normally closed contacts of the stop relay, The stop relay is picked up if, and only if, the
stop key is depressed and one of two circuits completed, The first of these is completed by FC-106

and relay contacts governed by the code Miscellaneous 87, while the second is governed by the code
57

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

ONE CYCLE
START RELAY FC-1I03, 108 |
READ RELAY FC-105 | |
SEQUENGE RELAY G-7 FG-IOl, 102 =
SEQUENGE RELAY C-8 FC-IOI, 102 z=
REPEAT RELAY FG-107 — |
STOP RELAY FG-t06 |

Figure 21

Miscellaneous 7 in combination with the "7 stop switch", The stop relayis held up through one of its own
contacts and the stopkey, The emergency stop switch is located on the sequence mechanism, (Plate VI),
The 87 stop and the 7 stop have decidedly different purposes, The 87 stop maybe so coded in a control
tape that if the stop key is depressed the machine will stop at a preassigned point in the computation.
On the other hand, the 7 stop switch together with the stop key will interrupt the operation of the
machine after reading any line of coding containing a Miscellaneous 7, This makes it possible to stop
the calculator at the end of any functional operation without interfering with the computation provided
that no operations have been interposed. Further discussion of the codes 87 and 7 is contained in
Chapter IV.

The relays, relay points and cam controlled contacts in Figs. 17, 18 and 20 have been indicated
and numbered as in the calculator itself. For simplicity, one relay, the start interlock relay, has been
omitted from these circuits. In the event that the start key is held down too long, the start interlock
relay prevents the calculator from receiving more than one starting impulse, The circuits of this relay
together with all of the automatic continue operation circuits which may energize the start relay are
given in Appendix II.

Unlike the main sequence control, the operations dictated by the subsidiary sequence control
are not subject to permutation, Consisting of relay networks and counters, the twenty subsidiary

controls at present wired in the calculator direct fixed series of operations, These are largely
58

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

concerned with the sequences of operations necessary to the control of the functional units, However,
it is possible to construct a subsidiary sequence control for any given purpose, For example, the
evaluation of a definite integral may be reduced to the computation of values of the integrand for equi-
distant values of the argument bya short control tape, which alsodirects a subsidiary sequence control .
wired to apply a general quadrature formula. In this instance, the coding necessary to the evaluation
of definite integrals is greatly reduced. Such specialized subsidiary sequence controls are added to
the calculator from time to time as may be desired, These differ only in the sense that some control
a greater number of operations and in that their control extends overalonger period of time, Unfor-
tunately, space will not permit the description of all of the sequence controls in the calculator. The
fact that these controlling multiplication and division are not only the most simple, but also the more
basic in computation, dictates their choice for detailed discussion.

Before entering upon this subject, however, it will be necessary to discuss the use of counters
and their drive. Referring to Fig.22,A is a line shaft extending nearly the full length of the calculator
and driven by the four horsepower motor, B. This shaft is contained in the shaft housing shown near
the base of the machine in Plates Il, Mand XII. The main sequence mechanism and the three interpo-

lator mechanisms are supplied with mechanical power by roller chain and sprocket drives, C and D,

MECHANICAL DRIVE SYSTEM

—

Figure 22
59

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

respectively, The spiral gears, E, connect the main drive shaft to the vertical shafts, F. These in
turn are connected to the horizontal shafts, G, through smaller spiral gears, H. On the shaft, G, are
mounted twelve or fewer gear wheels, J of Fig. 22, E of Plate XVII, each of which supplies mechanical
power to a single counter wheel by engaging with the gear shown in the partially assembled counter,
A of Plate XVII, Since the sequence and interpolator mechanisms and counter wheels are all driven
by a single gear-connected mechanical system, it is clear that all mechanical parts of the machine
revolve in synchronism with each other.

Each counter wheel is an electro-mechanical assembly consisting of the following major com-
ponents shown in Plate XVII: (1) a commutator mounted in a molded plastic part, B and J, commonly
called a "molding", having a half slip ring and ten segmental contacts numbered 0 through 9; (2) a
pair of stranded wire brushes, C and F, which rotate to connect one of the contact segments with the
commutator half slip ring; (3) a magnetically controlled clutch, D, which engages to connect the con-
tinuously rotating gear, A, with the sleeve on which the rotating brushes are mounted; (4) a ten’s carry
contact which operates in conjunction with an external relay circuit to provide carry to the counter
wheel in the next higher columnar position when the counter wheel under consideration passes through
ten; (5) a nine's carry contact which also operates in conjunction with an external relay circuit to
provide carry to the next higher counter wheel when the wheel under consideration stands on nine and
the next lower wheel has passed through ten; (6) and finally, a socket, G and K, by which the counter
assembly may be jack-connected to the calculator wiring.

The ten segments of the commutator are usually called the number "spots", The time interval
necessary for the brush to traverse the distance between two successive spots is one-sixteenthof a
cycle,the number spots being sospaced in the commutator as to minimize the ratio of the mechanical
backlash to.the distance traversed between spots, In order to read, say, a seven into a counter, the
counter magnet is picked up at "seven time", thus engaging the clutch. The brushes are spun past
six spots and the clutch is mechanically disengaged or knocked off at "zero time", Obviously, nine
equally timed and equally spaced impulses must be provided to pick up the counter magnets in order
to read in the nine digits and all counters must be knocked off at zero time, (Fig. 23).

The number impulses are supplied by cam controlled contacts, A cam and its follower are
60

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

shown at the lower right in Plate XVI, and the position in which the cams are mounted is shown in
Fig,22,K. The duration of contact controlled bya cam maybe varied by adding or subtracting rollers
in the twenty possible sockets ina cam wheel, Several types of followers are used, with variations
in the sharpness of the make and break of the contacts they control.

For purposes of cam timing, the fundamental cycle of the calculator, 300 milliseconds, is sub-

divided into sixteen equal parts commonly referred to as "points". These are numbered:

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 +t +O 11 12 13 14 #15 16

ne cycle = 16 points

The first nine subdivisions contain the number impulses, The so-called "seven impulse", for example,
is delivered byacam contact making at seven time and breaking half way between seven and six time,
commonly called sevenand one-half time. The points zero through sixteen are available to supply carry
and other control impulses. A timing diagram of the number and carry impulses is given in Fig. 23.

As stated in Chapter II, the transfer of a quantity to a reset counter and the process of addition
are one and the same. For instance, a counter stands at zero; a seven impulse picks up the counter
magnet at seven time; the counter wheel rotates through six positions, is mechanically knocked off

at zero time and comes to rest standing on the seven spot. On the other hand, if a counter stands at

98?7r6543 2:10 tl 2 B 14 15 16
IMPULSE a
IMPULSE a

mami ae =
Mr VLOe =

IMPULSE as

IMPULSE |

IMPULSE a

IMPULSE a

IMPULSE a

IMPULSE as

MECHANICAL KNOCK OFF i

CARRY IMPULSE a
MECHANICAL KNOCK OFF {
CARRY CONTACT KNOCK OFF I

—NUHUMD-10 0

Figure 23
61

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

five, a seven impulse picks up the counter magnet at seven time; the counter wheel rotates through
six positions, is mechanically knocked off at zero time and comes to rest standing on the two spot,
having passed through zero,

As the counter wheel turns, the carry cam, (Fig. 24 and F of Plate XVII), also turns. When the
rotating brush touches the nine spot, the follower of the carry cam is dropped and the nine's carry
contact is made, (B of Fig. 24). As the counter wheel passes nine and approaches the zero spot, the
follower is raised and the ten's carry contact is made, (C of Fig. 24). The ten's carry contact once
made is maintained, (D of Fig. 24), until a mechanical knock off returns the carry contact to neutral
position, (A of Fig, 24), at fourteen and one-half time. Prior to this, the counter magnet, as shown in
Fig. 23, is again picked up at twelve time by the carry impulse if the carry relay circuits are closed
and if the ten's carry contact of the next lower counter is made, The counter magnet is also picked up
at twelve time by the carry impulse if the carry relay circuits are closed and if the nine's carry con-
tacts of the succeeding lower counters receive a carry impulse due to a still lower ten's carry, The

counter wheel moves one position for the carry and is again mechanically knocked off at thirteen time,

Figure 24
62

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

a
a

i2 7 4 | i «| [>| 8 «| 5 [>| 2

i3 13|

1,2,3 OUT- RELAY 10-24TH COL. CARRY CONTACT - 10
4,5,6 IN- RELAY 11- 24TH GOL. GARRY CONTACT- 9
7,8 GARRY RELAY 12, 13 GARRY BOOSTERS

9 GARRY CONTROL RELAY

STORAGE COUNTER RELAYS

Figure 25

These operations may be clarified by considering the relay circuits associated with the storage
counters, The relays are shown in Plate X, and their usual numbering and position in Fig. 25, There
are thirteen individual relays providing the normal circuits for each counter. Some of these are
grouped to function as a single relay of more than twelve poles, this being the maximum number of
poles available in any single relay as such, Relays 1, 2 and 3 compose the out-relay, while 4, 5 and 6
compose the in-relay, Relays 7 and 8 are the carry relays, with 9 serving as the carry control relay.
Also part of the carry circuits are relays 12 and 13, the carry booster relays, The nine's and ten's
carry contacts, of the twenty-fourth column counter, control relays 11and 10 respectively, these being
employed in the end around carry circuit.

The storage counter cams, SC-1 through -9, control the number impulses for reading out either
from a switch or from a storage counter, Figure 26 shows the circuits for a read-out, The out-relay
is energized byacircuit through the sequence relay cascade contacts as previously discussed. Begin-
ning at the positive terminal of the generator, the read-out circuit of a counter is completed to the
buss through the reset and invert relays, via the brushes connecting the number spots to the half slip
ring and thence through the out-relay, The read-out circuit of a switch is exactly similar except that
the commutator of the counter is replaced by the manually preset switch contacts, The wiring by
which the energized invert and reset relays provide complements on nine and ten respectively is also
shown in Fig. 26.

In order to read into a counter, a circuit is completed through the in-relay connecting the buss

to the counter magnets and to the negative terminal of the generator, If a quantity is standing in the
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

I

J

(0)

|

oO

A 4 4 & & A R 4 8

RELAY

INVERT
RELAY
OUT
RELAY
Figure 26

_

\ \

PPP PPPPe,

\

Aw

\ \ AY

\

\ \w \

\

PPPEPPEre,

A

\ \ ))

\

\

JJJ)))) 23

\

\

i
aA
L

@-3

BUSS

me,
T
Nn
—OT
T

63

counter at the time of read-in ‘so that addition must be performed, the carry circuits are utilized, As

shown in Fig, 27, the carry control relay, 9, is picked up by an impulse, controlled by SC-13, at two

time, The first point of this relay, through SC-12, then controls the pick up of the carry relays,7 and
64

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

+.
T 1 T ai
SC -12 6 BUSS sc-10 | $c-13 | sc-14
° IN- RELAY
5-1 g-p [riscl2 15-1 | 4-12 | 4-1
is RESET
CARRY CONTACTS 10
io] 9 io| 9 io| 9 io| 9
ules | OF
4 4 b + 3
0-9 13-3]13-2 12-aii2-
tl pire rie!
fe d
re)
. Pent 8-1 tae 7-1 9-4
T J coves COL. 13 | CoOL 4 9

aia 6 a6 COL. 12 ©

N STORAGE COUNTER MAGNETS AND RELAYS

8,at eleven time. The second point of the carry control relay and SC-12 control the pick up circuits
of relays 11 and 10, These circuits are completed through the nine's and ten's carry contacts, re-
spectively, of the counter in the twenty-fourth columnar position, The carry circuits are closed on
all read-ins except resets, when the carry control relay is not picked up due to the opening of the nor-
mally closed contacts of the reset relay. The tenth point of this relay is in the pick up circuit of the
carry control relay.

If a counter, other than the twenty-fourth, has passed through ten and its ten's carry contact
has been made, the carry impulse, at twelve time, through SC-10 and the appropriate carry relay

point, will energize the magnet of the counter in the next higher columnar position. If the twenty-
65

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

+, .
sc-t5 FC-100
*) RELAY
$c-18
¢-5-1
C-4-! li-2
SEQUENCE 24TH COLUMN
RELAYS C-3-l CARRY CONTACT
CASCADE io 1°) 9
CONTACTS e 3-3 OUT
CODE MISC. 2 ? o-p-1 c + RELAY
G-l-2
INVERT
SEQUENCE - II 7 iS T RELAY
Figure 28

fourth column counter carry contact stands at ten, relay 10 will have been energized at eleven time,
Then the carry impulse at twelve time controlled by SC-10 will travel through the first point of the
carry relay, 7, and pick up the magnet of the first column counter for an end around carry. Careful
study of Fig. 27 will make clear the operation of the circuits when several successive counters stand
on nine and a carry impulse is provided by the next lower counter.

The circuits for switches and storage counters including the circuits for all of the specialized
storage counters are given in Appendix III, Further, the relay list, Appendix VI, includes all of the
normal and special storage counter relays together with specific functions of each of the relay points,

Among others in Appendix III will be found the circuits by means of which it is possible to read

positive and negative absolute magnitudes out of any storage counter, The first of these circuits finds
66

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

MULTIPLIGAND - DiV

ped

iSOR (i-2

MULTIPLICAND - DIVISOR (3-6)
MULTIPLICAND - DIVISOR (4-8)

MULTIPLIGAND - DIVISOR (7) MULTIPLICAND - DIVISOR (5)
MULTIPLIGAND - DIVISOR (9)

DIVIDEND

PRODUGT - QUOTIENT

CYGLE |Q-SHIFT SEQ. MULTIPLIER

INTERMEDIATE

PLUG SWITGHES PUSH PLUS
BOARD BUTTONS BOARD
Figure 29

application in connection with the "intermediate" counter through which all quantities must be read in
passing into the multiply-divide unit, The operation of the positive absolute magnitude read-out circuit
is dependent upon the presence or absence of a nine in the twenty-fourth column. Upon read-out, the
presence of a nine brings about the pick up of the invertrelay. Figure 28 illustrates the positive abso-
lute read-out as employed in connection with the storage counters, In this figure,C-4-1,for example,
refers to the first point of the fourth cascade relay in the C group. The particular C relays shown
are those necessary to the pick up of the sequence relay 11 called for by the code Miscellaneous 2;
c.f.,page 16, The second branch of the circuit in Fig,28 shows the pick up at thirteen time of storage
counter relay 11, This circuit is completed through 3-1, the first point on the third relay composing
the storage counter out-relay, and through the nine's carry contact of the twenty-fourth column counter,
The third branch circuit at fourteen time picks up the invert relay through the second point of storage
counter relay 11 and through the third point of the third relay composing the out-relay. The use of the

positive absolute magnitude read-out circuit has been explained here because the application of such
67

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

a circuit in multiplication and division will reduce the problem to one dealing with positive absolute
magnitudes only during these operations.

The counters in the multiply-divide unit and the functional units are not the simple single mold-
ing counters that compose the storage registers. The functional counters are equipped with several
commutators, each set in a separate molding, and have special wiring which enables these counters
to perform operations other than simple addition, The operations of adding into and resetting of the
multiple molding counters are, however, the same as in the case of the storage counters, The counters
of the multiply-divide unit may be seen in Plate XI and are arranged as shown in Fig, 29. These
counters will require individual description, For this purpose,a calculator consisting of six columns,
the sixth column being reserved for the algebraic sign, will be assumed. This miniature calculator
may perform all of the operations of the calculator itself. The correspondences given in the table

below will be valid under this assumption,

Register Calculator Miniature Machine
Column Column

Switch 24 6

23 5

22-1 4-1
Storage Counter 24. 6

23 5

22-1 4-1
Intermediate Counter 24 6

23-1 5-1
MC-DR Counters 24 6

23-1 5-1
MP Counter 23-1 5-1
PQ Counter 47 11

46-1 10-1
DD Counter 45-1 9-1
Q-Shift Counter 2-1 1
Sequence Counter 1 1
Cycle Counter 1 1

68
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

As previously mentioned, the most frequently used of the muitipiy-divide counters is the inter-
mediate counter, The multiplicand (MC), divisor (DR), multiplier (MP) and dividend (DD) all pass
through this counter as they enter the multiply-divide unit. All these quantities are read into the
intermediate counter just as they stood in the storage counter from which they were selected. All
four values are read out of intermediate to the appropriate counters as positive absolute magnitudes.

| The MC andMPare transferred without being shifted, but the DR and DD are read out from the inter-
mediate counter so shifted that their first significant digits appear in the twenty-third and forty-fifth
columns of the DR and DD counters respectively.

The intermediate counter has twenty-four columns, The twenty-fourth column is a four com-
mutator, usualiy calied “four moiding", counter, The first molding is used for ordinary read-outs and
resets, The second molding is used to determine whether it is necessary to sense through zeros or
through nines to obtainthe amount of shift necessary in reading DR and DD to their respective counters,
The third molding, if the twenty-fourth column stands at nine, forms a part of the pick up circuit of
the relays controlling the entry of a nine into the forty-seventh, or sign counter, of the product-quotient
counter (PQ). The fourth molding, if the twenty-fourth column stands at nine, forms a part of the pick
up cireuits of the intermediate invert relay which delivers the positive absolute value of MC, DR, MP
or DD if these quantities were negative when they entered the multiply-divide unit. The remaining
twenty-three columns of the intermediate counter are three molding counters, The first moldings are
used for ordinary read-outs and resets, The second and third moldings are used when sensing through
zeros and nines respectively to determine the amount of DR or DD shift.

The nine integer multiples of the MC and DR are buiit up in the muitiplicand-divisor counters

counters,

. Six coun , Storing the
(1-2), (3-6), (4-8), (5), (7) and (9) multiples, are used for this purpose. Of these, the first three are
equipped with "doubling" read-outs; i.e., they have extra moldings so wired that they may read out
either the number upon which they stand or twice that number. The wiring diagram of a doubling
counter is shown in Fig, 30, The number impulses are provided as usual by cam controlled contacts,
In the counter shown, the read-out may be through one of four relays; reset, build-up, times one or

times two, As shown, the doubling counter requires four moldings, The first molding is used for
69

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

ordinary read-outs and resets, The second molding is used for the doubling read-out when there is
no carry from the next lower column, The third molding is used for the doubling read-out when there
is carry from the next lower column, The fourth molding controls the doubling read-out of the counter
in the next higher columnar position, selecting its second or third molding according as there is not
or is carry from the counter under consideration, All of the MC-DR counters have twenty-four columns
except MC-DR (1-2), which has twenty-three, and all are equipped with normal carry circuits but no
end around carry, MC-DR (5), (7) and (9) are composed of single molding counters exactly similar to
those used in the storage registers,

It is interesting to note that two and five are the only integer multiples which may be obtained
from a static reading circuit without using an undue amount of equipment, In the case of the two multi-
ple, the only carry number is unity and hence a carry from the nth column to the (n+ 1)st cannot
affect a column of still higher order, Therefore, the circuits of a doubling read-out must pass through
not more than two counter columns. A similar situation obtains in connection with the five multiple
as may readily be seen, Since a quintupling counter is not used in the calculator, no further details
of such circuits will be given here,

The MP counier consists of twenty-three double molding counter wheels, The first molding of
each is used for resets, The second selects the proper multiples of MC to be read out of the MC-DR
counters,

The dividend counter has forty-five single molding columns, During multiplication, the multiples
selected by the even columns of the multiplier are added into DD in the proper columnar position,
Thus, if the digits in MP are 25137, then 3 x (MC) and 5 x (MC) are read into DD in the following

positions,

DD counter column
9 8 765 43 221
——— 3 x (MC)>

~—5 x (MC)

The odd multiples of MC are cared for in the PQ counter which will be described later,
710

NUMBER

SPOTS
oon ®)
5 oO
! oO
6 oO
2 0
7 6
3.20
8 Oo
4 oO
9 +O

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

9

MC-DR DOUBLING © TO BUILD UP RELAY
READ - OUT
TO RESET RELAY
© © ©
A
92-2-24 92-2-23 92-2-22 3
. ~ i: rT — _ —— = — = ——
fell ttell sll sll ell tretl li ell elle
1 ce) 2 -O Q | 4 -O ce) ce) 4 D
E
| F
fo) re) ° —>—O fe] fe) ce) p—O .°) .°) 1°) a
L i 1 1 S
a1) oll 9 J o 9 o}] ol 9 4
J
K
oH eit e Ol} 911 Ot) 9 ol} oll oll 9 L
Pi Pie ol) Gi) ei. e ool ott ott on
N
)
ell pil Leet gil eit ell ireil ell eli ell
T
ol] oll ¢ 4} di o}1] O11 o|l ei] ok
5
=
all il ¢ IKK allel ell
| | |
b]] dl] off Leel] d]] d]f off bel] 4]] $f) off oy
L 4 i .
Ww
Xx
TO TIMES! ONE RELAY
© ©
TO TIMES TWO RELAY
ro)
COLUMN 24 COLUMN 23 COLUMN 22

Figure 30 A
TO BUILD UP RELAY

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

71

® © 9
TO RESET RELAY 92-171

“ ot NUMBER
3 92-1-3 Pspt-e IMPULSES

1 dodo 4 dd _ ry {READ OUT
c reli ell |rell etl ell ell | reli olf gi] cams
TOOL LEI Ii)
; 92-3-| THRU 4
g Viele | ren il ail ele Tred etl ge '
4 fe) | 9 ol} o } ? ) 6
J 2
K

TL PH rou PE Sd ro Stl
M i |! q salieaint ° 2 z
N
P ry
Q Ti Pil 2 rot PU PH Pe rel ode 3
R fo) ? ~O | j ? 9
Ss
T
Hitt HE HEY 95-3-5THRUA

GSI
wW 8
x 9

LU a ae LU a u L U LU

TO TIMES| ONE RELAY
b e TO TIMES 1% RELAY °
~ COLUMN 3 ~ COLUMN 2 ° cova |

Figure 30 B
12

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

During division, the successive multiples of DR are subtracted from the dividend in the DD
counter. Since these subtractions terminate at least one column to the right with each successive
operation, end around carry is replaced by the addition of an elusive one in the lowest order column
of each subtrahend.

The product-quotient counter has forty-seven columns, The forty-seventh column of PQ, some-
times called the sign counter, has two moldings. The first of these is used for resets. The second,
if the counter stands at nine,forms a part of the circuits picking up the DD-PQ invert relay, in order
to read out the negative product or quotient, The sign counter is the only one in the machine which
cannot be reset by button. If the machine is stopped before a multiplication or division is terminated,
care must be taken to see that this counter is manually reset before continuing operation. This must
be accomplished by manipulation of the armature of the counter magnet,

During multiplication, the multiples selected bythe odd columns of the multiplier are added into
PQ in the proper columnar position. Thus, if the digits in MP are 25137, then 7 x (MC), (MC) and

2 x (MC) are read into PQ in the following positions.

PQ counter column
11 10 9 8 765 43 2 «1
w———7 x (MC)

-(MCc)——~

+——-2 x (MC)>

At the end of the multiplying operation, the multiples previously added into DD are transferred to PQ
and the final product read out from this counter, The device of adding the odd and even multiples of
MC into the PQ and DD counters, respectively, doubles the speed of multiplication because two multi-
ples may be added in each machine cycle.

The PQcounter in the case of division receives the digits of the quotient which are read in suc-
cessively, starting at the forty-sixth column,

The quotient shift counter (QS), as mentioned in Chapter II, is used to calculate the number of

columns the quotient must be shifted to the right upon reading out to the buss in order to conform with
73

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

the operating decimal position, This counter has two columns, The first column is a four molding
counter, Of these four moldings, the first is used for reset, The second, third and fourth are used
to read out quotient shifts amounting to zero through nine columns, ten through nineteen columns and
twenty through twenty-two columns, respectively. The second column of the QS counter has two mold-
ings, The first molding is again used for reset and the second to read out the tens digit of the amount
of shift in conjunction with the proper molding of the first column, The quantity standing in the QS
counter is not read out in the ordinary manner but rather the combination of number spots in the two
columns form a part of the pick up circuit required to select the appropriate section of the Q-shift
relay. During each dividing operation the QS counter receives four quantities, These are: (1) the
complement on nine of the amount of the DR shift left when reading from the intermediate counter to
the MC-DR counters; (2) the amount standing in the divide switch which is equal to 22 - n where the
operating decimal point lies between columns nand n+ 1; (3) anelusive one in the first column; (4) the
amount of the DD shift left when reading from the intermediate counter to the DD counter. The total
standing in the Q-shift counter must always be positive, as no provision is made for shifting the
quotient to the left because quantities so shifted would be above the capacity of the calculator under
the assumed operating decimal position, The shift is counted to the right considering the forty-sixth
column of PQ as corresponding to the twenty-third column of the buss,

All of the multiply-divide counters so far described are controlled by a subsidiary sequencing
circuit which includes two special counters, The first of these is the sequence counter which has one
four molding counter wheel, When the first line of multiply or divide coding has been read, this counter
is stepped forward one position, It continues to step once each cycle during the build-up of the inte-
ger multiples of MC-DR, for the resets of the intermediate counter and finally for the read-out of the
product or quotient. This counter also has the function of signalling the main sequence mechanism to
read the line of coding supplying the multiplier or dividend and the line of coding delivering the product
or quotient, The first molding of the sequence counter is used for resetting. The functions of the re-
maining three moldings are best presented in a table which lists the relays whose pick up circuits are
governed by each position of the sequence counter, The table includes the relays used both in multi-

plication and division,
74

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS
Seq. Cir. Second Moiding Third Molding Fourth Molding
1 Intermediate In Not used DD-PQ Reset
2 Shift Pick Up MC-DR In Intermediate
Q-Shift Invert Invert Control
3 First Build-Up First and Second Intermediate
Build-Up Reset
4 Intermediate In First and Second Second Build-Up
Build-Up Add-22
5 Shift Pick Up MP-In Intermediate
DD-In Invert Control
6 Not used Not used Intermediate
Reset
7 Sequence Ctr. _ MC-DR Reset Product Out
Reset
8 Not used
9 Not used

The impulse which steps the sequence counter is not derived from the number impulse cam con-
tacts. This impulse is supplied at zero time by a cam controlled contact, CC-10, and positions the
sequence counter fifteen points earlier than all other multiply-divide counters in order to give the
associated relay circuits ample time to operate before numbers are transferred.

The second special counter employed by the multiply-divide unit is the cycle counter, which
consists of one five molding counter of which the fifth molding is used for resetting. The first four
moldings of the cycle counter control the multiplying and dividing operations between sequence counter
positions sixandseven, During multiplication the cycle counter steps once cach cycle and these four
moldings determine the columnar positions in DD and PQ to which the multiples of MC are read. Dur-
ing division the cycle counter steps once each subtracting cycle, controlling the columnar positions in
DD from which the multiples of DR are subtracted.

The complete circuits for multiplication are given in Appendix IV, and for division in Appendix

V, These appendices aiso inciude timing diagrams which give the positions of relay and counter mag-
15
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

nets as picked up and held byimpulses through the cam controlled contacts, The relays used in multi-
plication and division, including the functions of each wired point, are listed in Appendix VI, Each
cam, with the time of make and break of its contact and its function, appears in Appendix VII. The
multiply-divide fuses are classified in two ways in Appendix VIII; first, listing the relays and the fuse
to which each is connected, and second, listing the fuses and the relays which they serve. Figure 31 |
shows, cycle by cycle, the transfers of quantities from counter to counter in the multiply-divide unit
during the multiplication 0.3461 x 2.5137 = 0.8699, The operation is carried out onthe miniature six-
column calculator previously mentioned.

Cycle 0
The sequence mechanism reads the first line of multiply coding (A, 761, blank), The sequence counter
advances to one,

Cycle 1
The MC is read from storage counter A via the buss to the intermediate counter, The intermediate
carry circuits, including end around carry, are energized, The DD, PQ and QS counters are reset.
The sequence counter advances to two. | | |

Cycle 2
The positive absolute value of MC is read into MC-DR (1-2), (3-6), (5), (7) and (9) within the multiply
unit, (Fig, 32), The sequence counter advances to three,

Cycle 3
If a nine stood in the twenty-fourth column of the intermediate counter (MC < - 0), a nine is read into
the forty-seventh column of PQ. The intermediate counter resets, The first build-up takes place;
i.e., the first step is taken in building up the nineinteger multiples of MC. Twice the MC is read from
the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (3-6), (4-8), (5) and (9) within the multiply unit,
(Fig. 32), The sequence counter advances to four, The sequence mechanism reads the second line of
multiply coding (B, blank, blank),

Cycle 4
The MP is read from storage counter B via the buss to the intermediate counter. The complete inter-

mediate carry circuits are energized, The second build-up takes place, completing the nine integer
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

Cye

No.

oO Or|4 cn, wn Wy UNICD?
Wh ° fone) ry ° a o lo
=
ae ° O at al cal Aa ory ec>
a3 ° oR Cay ° a 8 aoe (a)
ge ° 2 |o fon] a ei oie
. i) °o lo fo) ° o le
=~ ° a = =tiolo
a7 ° a = =trole
238 fo] io fee) wm Nic
eA ° Nel ery ony o>
To ° (a) rt 1 ole
8 Oo [oe] oO Q iC
° Odld ory IO
fo) ome) Bi pt 4 co leo
° oO ~t|-t vi a ory 10
° Om gS « 9 o |o
por » Pan (o)
°o o jo Pom
° o jo Ne) o 10
ino
" io) Od g r
bar to
oe Qo oO. RO Sd so atC>
A 9 I~ crsQic>
a“ § ° o 3 vo” o |e
ao fa) Omen 4 %” » oy Cd
a8 ro) °o |o ~ 3 + o lo
| i
o o O ria |? Tota ~oryo
o~
a ° Q.0 m4 acto
a8 ° © «tt g°O5 & HAO
BE ° Omen | @aw 3 Wino
=) ° o jo| eas a oo
oO rin
5 ° o lo | Soo o lo
as Oe | ade 8 rales in eo wo dfn
a oe) ™ 2
® Ne) 5 on &
oO
are) —t ) °
Bg g Q in 3
g3 19 3
nao ° g n ca
° °
O° eq no Cal LN °Q

76

Figure 31 A

77

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

Bs ° 4 ] ” -t un ee) ~ 0 on cS}
é nmo ome fe JK} me ip me mE pe ie
ro wo alo oale fa fad ai fa | amin [un fn
n nx wlo onlin faim fo Im] mola da fa
., ray amo Ott | stolo lo jo] oma] a [a 8p
8 un wialo only | aad J nwlo fo lala fo x
gy et Halo oO lo | omm] maha fun fin | un-sfon 2
8 t ~trolo © foto fo] one] ~ |o | ark °
Ne) x0 -210 o foto jo] owbe |] wo fo | wale 8
oO adlo 2 jojo jolo jofo jlolo fe
n a wlo © joflo lofo folo jeflo fo
Q ° lo ° fo So lojio lofo lolo loflo lo |
° 2 fo o jlo jo
cw OW NIO Ome, fon wy £
ks d caalo Ole | wo ro 8
3 -“ nro Omen fowol fo mM _.--
ag re) 0 -tlo . o lolo fo
8 é~ ~mlo Odie | aes
on ado eo fo lore 2
nv nwo o lo | oda Q
ray melo o lofo fo °
ok
Be ° Oda | af | wdfn | mapa | apa | info
ke ° one
8 ° Omen
a § ° o aH
ie] co) OURAN
° ° onle

oO ond et NON CA SOLON aAryo

Sy ° foun.) <0 aulco 0 .0]-t tolo
2 ° © -t[-t | -t fen ae aao
Ba O° Omen | nwo o fH Aao
oo ° oe jolo fa inten ano
= ° eo lofo fo °o lo o lo
° one |. oye ~no

By o- Q.0 0 xoJou NWO
2 °°! ° tft tro 4 nolo
a ° Ome on fs 8 ~tolo
Ze ° °o flo ola a t]o
° ° lo o lo 2 lo

Figure 31 B

78

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

CLE 2 CYCLE 3 CYCLE 4
INTERMEDIATE \ MC- DR (1-2) MC - DR (I-2)
MG- DR (3-6) MC- DR (3-6)
MG- DR (4-8) MG - DR(4-8)
MG- DR (5) MG-DR (5) MG - DR (5)
\ MG-DR (7) \ MG- DR (7)
\ \
MG- DR (9) ' MC- DR (9) : MGC-DR (9)
Figure 32

multiples of MC-DR, Twicethe MC is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (4-8)
and (5), Six times MC is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (3-6) to MC-DR (7) and (9),
(Fig. 32). The sequence counter advances to five.

Cycle 5
The positive absolute value of MP is read to the MP counter from the intermediate counter, The
sequence counter advances to six. The cycle counter advances to one,

Cycle 6
If a nine stood in the twenty-fourth column of the intermediate counter (MP <- 0),a nine is read into
the forty-seventh column of PQ. There is no endaround carryfrom column forty-seven to column one
of PQ, The eight spot of column forty-seven of PQ is jumpered to the zero spot. The algebraic sign
is, therefore, cared for in the following manner,

+ s+ = + corresponds to 0+ 0 = 0,

+
.

t

tt

- corresponds to 0+ 9 = 9,

- .+ = - corresponds to 9+ 0 = 9,

+ corresponds to 9+ 9-8-0,
79

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

If, at the end of multiplication, a nine stands in the forty-seventh column of PQ, the product is in-
verted as it is read out into the buss, since it stands in PQ as a positive absolute magnitude, The
intermediate counter resets and is ready for the next multiplying or dividing operation. Under control
of the cycle counter, the multiples corresponding to the digits in the first and second columns of MP
are added into PQ and DD respectively, The cycle counter is advanced to two.

The multiples of MC continue to be selected in pairs and added, while the shift circuits advance
the columns of entry into PQ and DD under control of the cycle counter. If both of a pair of digits of
MP, one in an odd and one in an even column, are zero, the next pair of multiples is immediately
properly shifted and added. If the entire MP is zero, cycle 6 is combined with cycle 9, If the MP is
not zero, but contains n non-zero digits in either the odd or even numbered columns, whichever is the
greater, then n - 1 cycles intervene between cycle 6 and cycle 9+6 +n, Thus, in order to increase
the speed of multiplication, whenever possible the number having the fewer non-zero digits should be
used as the multiplier, If a multiplication is to be performed in which one factor is a constant, this
quantity should usually be used as the multiplier because the number of non-zero digits and their po-
sitions are known. This makes it possible to interpose a predetermined number of operations during
the multiplication, (See Chapter IV, Coding, Multiplication.)

Cycle 7 (4 +n)
A pair of multiples is added into PQ and DD. The cycle counter is advanced,

Cycle 8 (5 +n)
The last pair of multiples is added into PQ and DD. The cycle counter is advanced,

Cycle 9 (6 +n)
The first DD to PQ transfer takes place. The quantity standing in the lower half of DD is added into
the lower half of PQ, The cycle counter is advanced for the last time, If MP = 0, this cycle combines
with cycle 6,

Cycle 10 (7 +n)
The second DD to PQ transfer takes place, The quantity standing in the upper half of DD is added into
the upper half of PQ. The MC-DR, MP and cycle counters are reset in preparation for the next oper-

ation, If the multiplying operation is interrupted, these counters together with the intermediate,
80
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

sequence and PQ sign counters must be manually reset before continuing operation, The sequence

counter advances to seven. The sequence mechanism reads the last line of multiply coding (blank, C, 7).
Cycle 11 (8 + n)

The product is read out to storage counter C via the buss and the multiply plugging. (See Chapter V,

Plugging Instructions.) The product is inverted if a nine stands in the forty-seventh column of PQ.

The sequence counter and the forty-seventh column of PQ, the sign counter, are reset, The sequence

mechanism reads the next line of coding.

It may readily be seen from Fig.31 that the rounding off error in multiplication is less than one
in the lowest order column read out; i.e., if the operating decimal point lies, for example, between
eclumns 15 and 16, the rounding off error will be less than 1x 19715,

Included in Appendix IV are the circuits of the low order read-out of PQ and of the normalizing
register, both described in Chapter II, The use of these circuits and their coding is considered inde-
tail under High Accuracy Computation and Normalizing Register in Chapter IV,

Division makes use of all of the functional counters used in multiplication except the MP counter,
This process does, however, make use of the QS counter, previously described on page 72, The pair
of dial switches just to the right of the sequence mechanism must be set to 22 - n where the operating
decimal point lies between columns n and n+1, Division also requires plugging to terminate the
operation after the desired number of comparisons have been made, This plugging and the coding
controlling it are considered under Division in Chapters IV and V.

Figure 33 shows the transfer, cycle by cycle, of the quantities in the multiply-divide unit during
division, Again the miniature six-columncaiculator is used for purposes of illustration, The division
of - 0.375 by + 0.213 to give - 1.760 is performed, The operating decimal point is considered to lie
between columns three and four, the divide switch being set at 4 - n = 4 - 3 = 1, since column four of
the miniature calculator corresponds to column twenty-two of the actual machine, The division is
considered to be plugged for five comparisons.

Cycle 0
The sequence mechanism reads the first line of divide coding (A, 76, blank), The sequence counter

advances to one,
81

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

Cycle 1
The DR is read from storage counter A via the buss to the intermediate counter. The intermediate
carry circuits, including end around carry, are energized, The DD, PQ and QS counters are reset,
The sequence counter advances to two,

Cycle 2
The positive absolute value of DR is read, without traversing the buss, to MC-DR (1-2), (3-6), (5), (7)
and (9) so shifted that its highest significant digit appears in the twenty-third column of MC-DR (1-2),
The complement on nine of the number of columns the DR is shifted left is read into the QS counter.
An elusive one is read into the first column of the Qs counter, The sequence counter advances to
three,

Cycle 3
If a nine stood in the twenty-fourth column of the intermediate counter (DR Ss - 0), a nine is read into
the forty-seventh column of PQ. The intermediate counter resets, The first build-up takes place.
Twice the DR is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (3-6), (4-8), (5) and (9)
within the multiply-divide unit, The sequence counter advances to four, The sequence mechanism
reads the second line of divide coding (B, blank, blank),

Cycle 4
The DD is read from storage counter B via the buss to the intermediate counter, The complete inter-
mediate carry circuits are energized, The second build-up takes place, completing the nine integer
multiples of DR. Twice the DR is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (4-8)
and (5), Six times DR is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (3-6) to MC-DR (7) and (9), The
quantity standing in the divide switch is read into the QS counter, The sequence counter advances to
five,

Cycle §
The positive absolute value of DD is read into the DD counter so shifted that its highest significant
digit appears in the forty-fifth column of DD, The number of columns the DD is shifted left is read
into the QS counter, completing the computation of the number of columns the quotient must be shifted

to the right when it is read out, The sequence counter advances to six and the cycle counter to one.
82

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS
Cyc Storage Seq | Intermediate | MC-DR (1-2) | MC-DR (3-46) MC-DR (4-8) wc-pR (5)
No. Counter Ctr Counter Counter Counter Counter Counter
0 000213 ie) oo0000 00000 000000 000000 000000
DR aL :
1
1 1 000000
DR to Int a 213
2 000213
2 2 DR to MC~DR 00000 000000 oc0000
1 | (3-2),G-6) | 22 213 21
3 | (5),(7),(9) | 21300 | 021300 021300
3 999624 13 | 00021312 tims DR | 021300 000000 | 021300
DD a 897 to MC-DR 426 26 426
4h | 000000 (3-648) 063900 |042600 | 063900
5) 49)
A L 0900000 | 2 times DR 6 times DR 042600 063900
DD to Int i 624 to MC-DR to MC-DR 426 426
5 1999624 | (4-8), (5) (7), (9) 085200 {106500
5 5
1 to DD
6
6 999624 to DR to DR to DR to DR
111486 Compare Compare Compare Compare
000000
7
inverted
to DD
8 to DR to DR to DR to DR
Compare Compare Compare Compare
16 to DR to DR to DR to DR
Compare Compare Compare Compare
i 6 times DR
inverted
to DD
12 to DR, te DR to DR to DR
Compare Compare Compare Compare
13 to DR to DR to DR to DR
Compare Compare Compare Compare
ih 6
= inverted
7 to DD
15 000000 7 21300 063900 085200 106500
998239 | 3 897 a a 256 9 45
998239 [e 00000 000000 000000 000000

Figure 33 A

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

83

MC-DR (7) MC-DR (9) Qs Cyc DD PQ Cyc
Counter Counter Ctr Ctr Counter Counter No.
oo00000 000000 2 0 163649670. 885320754 8h 0
2 163649670 88532075484 1
& GR TE614 3 22578 35626
(0) o00000000 o0000000000
000000 oo0000 9) 2
213 213 7
021300 021300 a
g
021300 0 3
422 _
063900 0
021300 063900 8 4
1278 1278 i
149100 191700 9
9 0 O0GO0O00000 5
2 = 375 ,
1 1 375000000
to DR to DR to DD 0 6
Compare Compare Compare Zs
9
1 375000000 90000000000 7
Ss 78699 i
2 1 91000000000
162000000
to DR to DR to DD 8
Compare Compare Compare
inverted 2 162000000 G91lOO0000000 9
to DD i 85 899 vi
3 1 91700000000
O12900000
to DR to DR to DD 10
Compare Compare Compare
3 OL2900000 G91L17FOD0000000 11
a 872199 6
4 1 91760000000
100120000
to DR to DR to DD 12
Compare Compare Compare
to DR to DR to DD 13
Compare Compare Compare
4 100120000 91760000000 avy
aL 893499 5
5 1 91760500000
101013500
149100 L91700 5 9 15
9619 9193 5 1 to Storage
000000 000000 0 (o)

Figure 33 B
84
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

Cycie 6.
If a nine stood in the twenty-fourth column of the intermediate counter (DD = - 0), a nine is read into
the forty-seventh column of PQ, completing the determination of the algebraic sign of the quotient by
the same means as are used in multiplication. The intermediate counter resets and is ready for the
next multiplying or dividing operation, The nine integer multiples of the divisor are read to the DR
compare relay and the dividend is read to the DD compare relay, A sensing circuit through the com-
pare relays selects the largest multiple of the divisor less than the dividend, If all multiples are
greater than DD, the cycle becomes a "no go" cycle and the comparison is made again, shifted one
column to the right, in the next succeeding cycle, Since all comparing operations are identical, the
comparing circuits and their operation will be (Hustrated and described in connection with cycle 10,

Cycle 7
The selected multiple of DR is subtracted from DD, with an elusive one added in the first column of
the subtrahend., The digit defining the multiple is entered in the PQ counter. The cycle counter is
advanced, |

Cycles 8 and 9

These two eveles of the example duplicate the compare and subtract operations described in cycles 6

Cycle 10

This cycle duplicates the comparing operations performed in cycles 6 and 8. According to Fig, 33,
the quantity 012900000 now stands in the DD counter, Since, in the exampie, cycie 10 makes the third
comparison, the quantity 129000 istransferred tothe DD compare relay, This transfer is accomplished
by circuits of which one eolumn is shown in Fig. 34, In these and following circuits, certain relay
and hold points, not necessary to the discussion, have been omitted for the sake of brevity and clarity,
The complete circuits will be found in Appendix V.

The quantity 129000 is transferred to the DD compare relay by impulses derived from the cam
controlled contacts CC-1 through -9, By impulses derived from the same cam controlled contacts,

Fig, 34, each of the nine integer multiples of the divisor is read to the DR compare relay, The com-

pare relays are all provided with hold circuits, not shown in the figure, such that these relays once
85

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

OD COUNTER COLUMN 6

cc-l

CG-6

7 Tho-
“~~ To

CG-2

Pr

PF

PF

cC-7

PF

“Tre

amine

To

cc-8

cc-s

pe
DD COMPARE RELAY COLUMN 6

6)

TET ccs

PF

6)

PE cc-4

Q

OF

“TET _cc-5

MC-DR COUNTERS COLUMN 6

prob pbb bh
prpbdbpbbb «
ISSSSSSS95
fe foe foe sae
TAA

DR COMPARE RELAY COLUMN 6

Figure 34
_86

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

+ CC-24
a DD COMPARE
RELAY
Tz 2 COLUMN 6
DR COMPARE
- - . RELAY
oi 2°! 1-2 I-l COLUMN 6
4 OVER 3 OVER 2 OVER 1OVER
4 UNDER SUNDER 2 UNDER | UNDER
OVER-UNDER RELAY
a DD COMPARE
f ra 17 RELAY
Y3 1h { j< Ts Is COLUMN 6
DR GOMPARE
se 2) je! RELAY
9 OVER 8 OVER 7 OVER 6 OVER 5 OVER COLUMN 6
9 UNDER 8 UNDER 7 UNDER 6 UNDER 5 UNDER
OVER- UNDER RELAY ( _

Figure 35

picked up remain energized until twelve time, With the aid of the compare relays, DD is compared
with each of the nine integer multiples of DR at one and the same time. How this is accomplished will
be explained for the case of the sixth column of the miniature calculator, The integer standing in this
column of DD is one, The integers standing in the corresponding columns of the multiples of DR, one
through nine, are 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, respectively, At "one time" the DD compare relay is picked
up. Atthe same time, the DR compare relays associated with the five, six, seven, eight and nine
multiples are likewise picked up. As previously stated, all these relays are held until twelve time,
The DD and DR compare relays have contacts wired as shown in Fig.35, known as the over-under
circuits, The over and under relays are picked up by impulses supplied by the cam controlled con-
tact, CC-24, which is timed one-quarter impulse later than each of the number impulses derived from

CC-1 through -9, Each over relay is picked up through a normally open point of a DR compare relay
87

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

and a corresponding normally closed contact of the DD compare relay, Similarly, each under relay
is picked up through a normally closed point of a DR compare relay and a corresponding normally
open contact of the DD compare relay. Three cases must now be distinguished, (1) If the digit of a
DR multiple is greater than the digit of DD, the DR compare relay corresponding to the given multiple
is picked up before the DD compare relay and a circuit is completed through the normally closed point
of the DD compare relay and the normally open point of the DR compare relay to pick up the over relay.
(2) If the digit of a DR multiple is less than the digit of DD, the DR compare relay corresponding to
the given multiple is picked up after the DD compare relay anda circuit is completed through the nor-
mally open point of the DD compare relay and the normally closed point of the DR compare relay to
pick up the under relay. This is true of the one, two, three and four multiples in the example under
consideration, (3) If the digit of a DR multiple is equal to the digit of DD, the DR and DD compare
relays are picked up simultaneously and no circuit is completed to pickup either an over or an under
relay, This situation occurs in the case of the five, six, seven, eight and nine multiples in the example,

All of the over-under relays, like the compare relays, are held until twelve time. Recalling that
Figs, 34 and 35 are drawn for one column only, it should now be clear that the miniature calculator
has six DD compare, fifty-four DR compare and ninety-nine over-under relays corresponding to
twenty-four DD compare, 216 DR compare and 423 over-under relays in the calculator itself.

The over-under relays of all columns have contacts connected to form nine identical circuits,

called Q control circuits, one of which is shown in Fig, 36. These circuits are supplied with an
ro —-O
; OVER
RELAYS
- UNDER
RELAYS

COL-6 COL-5 COL-4 COL-3 COL-2 COL-jI

Q- CONTROL - 6 s _

+ 0C-37

Figure 36
88

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

impulse at eleven time by the cam controlled contact CC-27. Eachcircuit controls the pick up of one of
the nine Q control relays, The operation of these circuits may be made clear by a discussion of the
relays associated with the two highest columns, Three cases must again be distinguished. (1) If the
digit of a DR multiple is greater than the digit of DD in the sixth column, Fig. 36, the normally closed
over relay contact of column six will be open. No circuit will be closed to pick up a Q control relay.
(2) If the digit of a DR multiple is less than the digit of DD in the sixth column, the over relay contact
remains closed, the under relay transfers its contact and the circuit is completed to energize a Q con-
trol relay, (3) If the digit of a DR multiple is equal to the digit of DD in the sixth column, neither the
over nor the under relay is picked up. In this case the operation of the circuit is controlled by the
over-under relays associated with the fifth column and so on.

In the particular case of the example under consideration, the sixth Q control relay is picked up
by the normally open under relay contact of column four, since the digits in columns six and five have
been found equal. The Q control relays once picked up are held until nine time.

The last step in the comparison cycle consists of the selection of the multiple of the divisor to
be subtracted from the DD counier in the next succeeding cycle, This is accomplished by the circuit
shown in Fig, 37 made up of contacts of the Q control relays of which there are nine, one for each
integer multiple. The Q control relays have, by the over-under relays, been divided into two classes:
those not picked up, corresponding to DR multiples greater than DD; those which are energized and

correspond to DR multiples less than DD, In Fig.37, the cam controlled contact CC-31 at twelve and

+ CG-3i Q CONTROL RELAYS

ae ee ee ee | I f —O_ of >. ]

PT ATT AAA A
pee Pee}

TIMES RIGHT RELAY ! _

Figure 37
89
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

one-half time delivers an impulse to pick up the appropriate part of the "times right" relay corre-
Sponding to the positions of the contacts of the Q control relays, In the example, the nine, eight and
seven multiples are all greater than DD, while the six multiple is the largest multiple less than DD.
Hence, the impulse supplied by CC-31 passes through the normally closed Q control contacts nine,
eight and seven, and through the normally open contact, six, to the six times section of the times right
relay, In the next cycle this six times section of the times right relay serves as an out relay when
reading the selected six multiple to the DD counter for subtraction, The times right relay also
controls the entry of the digit defining the multiple into the PQ counter. The simple circuit for ac-
complishing this is given in Appendix V,

Cycle 11
This is a subtract cycle duplicating the subtracting operation of cycles 7 and 9, The appropriate digit
is entered into the PQ counter, The cycle counter is advanced.

Cycle 12
This isa compare cycle which yields a no go in the example,

Cycle 13
This is the fifth compare cycle, The place limitation plugging becomes operative to energize the relay
circuits terminating the division under discussion, If the calculator is plugged for n comparisons, a
minimum of n+1 cycles and a maximum of 2n cycles willoccur between the reading of the dividend
to the DD counter (cycle 5) and the read-out of the quotient (cycle 15),

Cycle 14
The last subtraction is made in the DD counter and the last digit of the quotient entered in the PQ
counter, The cycle and sequence counters are advanced for the last time, The sequence mechanism
reads the last line of divide coding (blank, C, 7).

Cycle 15
The quotient is read out to storage counter C via the buss and that part of the quotient-shift relay
selected by the quantity standing in the QS counter, The quotient is inverted if a nine stands in the
forty-seventh column of PQ, The MC-DR, sequence, cycle and sign (forty-seventh column of PQ)

counters are reset, The sequence mechanism reads the next line of coding,
90

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

It may be seen from Fig.33 that the rounding off error in division is either less than one in the
lowest order column read out, or Less than one in the column in which the last comparison is made.
If the operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16 and division is plugged for n compari-
sons, the rounding off error is less than 1 x 10715 or 1x 107", whichever is the greater.

The discussion of division completes the description of the fundamental computing circuits of
the calculator, those of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, There remain to be dis-
cussed the functional units, These consist of subsidiary sequence circuits which control the multiply-
divide unit and certain special counters, These counters are mounted to the right of the multiply-
divide unit, Plate XI, and are arranged as shown in Fig. 38. Among the special counters are the
iogarithin in-out counter (LIC), the logarithm counter (LOG), the exponential in-out counter (EIO) and
the sine in-out counter (SiO), As described on pages 37and 38, the LIO and SIO counters are available
for arithmetic operations in addition to their normal use in their respective units. The logarithm
sequence (LS), logarithm cycle (LC), exponential sequence (ES) and two sine sequence (SS i and SS,)
counters are subsidiary sequence controls similar to the sequence and cycle counters of the multiply-

divide unit, Inaddition to the functional counters and the multiply-divide unit,these sequence counters

PRINT I (1-12)
PRINT I (13-24)

PRINT IE (1-12)

PRINT Ir (13-24)

oto, 1X; | INT GK. INTERPOLATION
LIG (i-ZO0)
Es | Lc | Ls LOG (1-23)
EIO (1-24)
Ss, | SS, Slo (1-24)
LS,| LS, | PS PUNGH (1-24)

Figure 38
91

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

also control certain table relays, The wiring of a table relay (columns thirteen through twenty-four)
containing 7 and reading directly into the buss is shown in Fig.39, Such a relay is picked up through
the subsidiary sequence control and held through one of its own points during that part of a machine
cycle given over to the nine number impulses,

Since the computation of the logarithm, exponential and sine is accomplished by the multiply-
divide unit operating in conjunction with the functional counters and certain table relays, a complete
discussion of the electro-mechanical tables of these functions would further require only a description
of the functional sequence circuits, The theory of the methods employed together with the order in
which the operations are performed in the computation of the logarithm, exponential and sine was set
forth on pages 28 through 37 of Chapter II, The sequence circuits of the functional units are elaborate
extensions of the circuits already described under multiplication and division covering a great many
cycles, They would require a protracted discussion to set forth their operations cycle by cycle. Since
no new ideas of circuit design are introduced, the description would add but little to an understanding
of the basic principles of the calculator, Hence, the functional units will receive no further attention

here,

BUSS COLUMNS 24-13

™T RELAY

TEP PLP LES

cc-t CG-2 co-3 | CC-: | cCc-5 CG-6 CG-7 CC-8 cc-9

+
NUMBER IMPULSE CAMS

Figure 39
92
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

The interpolator units make use of three speciai counters (Fig. 38), the interpolation, the in-
terpolation check and the X, counters. All three of these function during tape positioning. As stated
in Chapter II, the interpolation counter receives the argument (and the highest order column of h)to
which the tape is to be positioned, The interpolation check counter also receives the argument, in
order to check the position of the tape when the interpolator mechanism has come to rest, The x
counter counts the number of coefficients passed over in stepping the tape and signals for a one to be
added or subtracted from the interpolation counter for each argument passed over. Once the tape has
been positioned, relay networks together with the x, counter control the computation, The interpo-
lation sequence circuits again are of the same general type as those used in the functional units,
dictating the operations to be performed by the multiply unit, The process of interpolation, however,
is further complicated by the necessity of reading numerical values from a tape, The reading of a
functional or value tape is similar to the reading of a sequence control tape, except that four lines of
holes, covering the same space as two lines of coding are read simultaneously, (Figs, 13 and 14),
Fig. 40 shows one column of the wiring employed for this purpose, The reading contacts are closed
in the distribution demanded by the punching in the tape, not shown in the figure, An impulse supplied
by FC-54 passes through the closed reading contacts to energize the value tape relays, These relays

are held through their own fourth points and FC-55, The value tape relays, like the sequence relays,

COLUMN N

READING CONTACTS FC-54 FC-55

I i re

VALUE TAPE RELAYS

Figure 40
93
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

form a cascade, The nine number impulses are read through a cascade (Fig, 41) for each column of
the tape to the corresponding column of the buss, Actually, Fig. 41 is drawn for the case of a value
tape rather than a functional tape and hence reads directly into the buss without passing through the
plugging and relays as required by the process of interpolation. (See Chapter V, Interpolators.)

In addition to the counters given over to the electro-mechanical tables of functions, Fig.38 also
shows the print and punch registers employed in the recording of computed results, The punch regis-
ter has twenty-four double molding counters and is equipped with complete carry circuits including
endaround carry, Thefirst moldings are employed for resets and for ordinary read-outs, thus making
the punch register available for use as an additional storage counter, The second moldings are used

to deliver the quantity standing in the punch register to the punchitself, This is accomplished by means

BUSS COLUMN N

4-2

© ©

cc-47 CC-3 cC-2 cc-9 CC-84 GC-l

CC-74 CC-6{ 6G-5

NUMBER IMPULSE CAMS

Figure 41
94

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

COLUMN SELECTION

aa Ty LL —_]

t

PUNCH RELAY

o—

o,
{>
ao a

a
|

L, id PLUGGING
onl oT NN er
ott ot Ne ~__, t -0~0-.2°
7 NN ey —~_,_ t -0-o-- 5
on ee TI —~__, t+
oT to tot NOT —~ gp foo. 4 8
ott ott et Nn No orn?
OT re rot nT] eT?
a a TT TN On FF
OTT tn OTT OF 8
~~ ee ott ag tO i"
os - a - t_o~0~ 0-44 =
COL 24 COL 23 COL 22 ' COL 2 COLI PUNCH —
PUNCH COUNTER - SECOND MOLDINGS MAGNETS
Figure 42

of the circuit shown in Fig,42. An impulse through the column selection contact of the punch and
through the energized punch relay passes to the halfslip ring of the twenty-fourth column of the punch
counter, From the half slip ring it travels via the brushes to the number spot, through another con-
tact of the punch relay to the punch magnets, The punch magnets control the punches which perforate
a standard tabulating machine card as shown in Fig.43, The quantity e, the base of natural logarithms,
and a serial number have been entered in this card. The operation of the punch magnets also com-
pletes circuits which control the forward motion of the card to the next column and the movement of
the column selection contact to the next lower column of the punch counter, The operation is repeated
until the integer in column one has beenpunched, The card is then skipped out of the punch and stack-
ed, The punch relay is energized and the punching operation initiated by the code Miscellaneous 5,
The normally closed contacts of the punch relay, not shown in the diagram, complete the ordinary

read-out circuits of the punch counter,
95

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

J

EE) CO) ECE eee | ee)

TET EDT IERERERRERERESTOTOIOICITITISESTIOTSEITOCOITICICITIITICICIOIITICICIETIOIS
222 20222M2222222M22222222222222222222222222 222222222222 22722222 2222222222 222222
333339333533539339M3M99M39335393333393333399333939333393339933393399333993333333
AAAAAEAGACAMAAAMAAAAAEAAAAAGAAAGASAAAGAOAAAAUAAAAAAAA GAA AA EAA AAA GOGH EAA EAES ADE
55555555555 5M5 555 5M5555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555 50
SECCG SEES EGCG SSCS EG SMSCESCGSG SCE SE SEG CESS GESGE CSCC SESSESSCSESCEGESSSGSGESEOOEES
TOQTTTT7TTTVTTTTTTTTTTITITTITATTDTIT TIT ITITTITIT E1777 177 7277971797777 TT TT
SERSMOMEMGME LTS ECT STOLE SARS SOL EGROS OSES RSECE RELA BRE GRER GENESEE ESRESESES Rae EEE

9999999999999B999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999999998

T274ES CT EPRN AMS KN CHAN PAASRAAMAARVASMT ARAN CCHSKHKAANNIAASSTCAANTOUSETAAON TANS ETS

Figure 43

The punch is equipped with a special circuit such that if there is no card in punching position,
a stop control prevents punching, stops the calculator and lights a red signal light, Other than this
circuit to avoid the loss of computed results, the punch wiring is of the standard type described in
the publications of the International Business Machines Corporation,

The moveable column selection contact of the punch is replaced in the print circuit by the print
step counter (PS), (Fig. 38), The print circuit is similar to the punch circuit, but considerably more
complicated due to the fact that the complements on nine as delivered to the print counters must be
inverted and printed in true form. The print circuit is further complicated because of the flexibility
required in the printing operation, For example, the typewriter plugboards provide controls by means
of whichzeros may be dropped off to the right and left, decimal points and minus signs may be printed
and the digits of the quantity horizontally spaced as desired, The plugging of the two line step counters
(LS 1 and LS 2) controls the vertical spacing of the quantities being printed, All of the plugging neces-
sary to the printing operation is described in detail in Chapter V.

The two print counters (Fig. 38) have complete carry circuits, including end around carry, and
may perform all of the operations of normal storage counters, They consist of twenty-four four
molding counters, The first molding is used for ordinary operations and resets, However, all four
moldings are used to deliver the quantities in the print counter to the magnets which operate the num-

ber keys of the typewriters, Except for these magnets the typewriters (Plate XIV) are standard
96
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

writing machines manufactured by the International Business Machines Corporation and described in
detail in that company's publications,

Located just below the typewriters (Plate XIV) are two card feeds, These read quantities from
standard tabulating machine cards (Fig. 43) into the calculator under control of the sequence mecha-
nism, Sequence relays control the pick up of the solenoids directing the downward motion of the card
through the feed and the pick up of the brush control relay, The nine number impulses, provided by

the control cams CC-17, 19, 21 and 23 are routed through a brush to the common roller, (Fig. 44).

CONTROL CAMS

+ _FG-I7 READ-OUT OF
; GARD COLUMN N
5 GUIDE ROLLERS
FG-19 MAKE 7
=|

O) FC- 21

BRUSH
—-.. | Xs CARD CONTROL
BREAK | ec- 23 CARD RELAY
—j}---—__o0_0-—__0-—
Le READING PLUG t__._©

BRUSH WIRE BUSS

KG

PATH OF GARD

Figure 44

The reading brush of each cardcolumn makes contact with the commonroller through the perforations
in the card, The motion of the card between the brushes and the common roller is so timed that the
number impulses and the number perforations in the card are synchronized, From the reading brush,
the impulse travels via the plugging and the brush control relay to the buss. The card feeds are

equipped with an automatic control such that a card jam or lack of cards in the feeds will stop the
97

ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS

calculator and light a red signal light. Like the card punch and the typewriters, descriptions of the
card feeds may be found in the publications of the International Business Machines Corporation.

The card feeds are the last of the component parts of the calculator to be described in this
chapter, The discussion of electrical circuits here given is far from complete. It is hoped, however,
that it will furnish an adequate preparation for the coding and plugging procedures to be discussed in
the two following chapters. These, followed by a study of the examples given in Chapter VI, will .
enable a mathematician to make full use of the calculator, and to exploit its facilities to the greatest

possible advantage.
98

CHAPTER IV
CODING
"These Babes of Grace should be taught by a master well verst in the cant language
or slang patter, in which they should by all means excel."

Early Elizabethan. Quoted in "Secret and Urgent" by Fletcher Pratt
The basic codes initiating the various available operations of the calculator may be employed
one after another as required in the solution of a problem without further change. However, in order
to attain the maximum speed of computation, full advantage must be taken of the methods of interpo-
sition, These are governed bya set of rules which can best be made clear by the study of a large num-
ber of examples, There are many coding routines, such as that for determining the square root by an

iterative process, which occur so frequentlyas to make standard coding procedures of real value. This

chapter includes the following sections containing the basic codes and certain of the longer procedures,

Section Page Section Page
Operational Codes 99 Exponential Unit . 165
Timing 105 Iterative Processes 170
Switches 107 | Sine Unit 182
Storage Counters 109 Interpolators 185
Multiplication 111 Design of Functional Tapes 195
Division 120 Methods of Differencing 202
Choice Counter : 129 Central-Difference Interpolation 206
Automatic Check Counter . 131 Newton-Gregory Difference Formula | 217
Multiple In-Out Counter 133 Subtabulation 224
Logarithm In-Out Counter 137 Inverse Interpolation 227
Sine In-Out Counter 139 Card Feeds . 228
High Accuracy Computation | 142 Card Punch 231
Normalizing Register 159 Printing 236
Logarithm Unit 162 Interposition of Machine Stops 241

99
SUMMARY OF OPERATIONAL CODES

The operational codes include all codes except those of the switches and the storage counters,
An operational code is defined as automatic if it initiates a process which controls the operation of
the machine for one or more succeeding cycles, A code which is non-automatic is read, acted upon
and the sequence mechanism steps to the next line of coding but does not read it, A non~automatic

code must lie under the control of an automatic code or a Miscellaneous 7 must be added.

Automatic Codes
OUT IN MISC.
Stop code, If the control switch on the sequence mechanism is down 87

and the stop key depressed, the machine will stop on the line follow-
ing the next 87 code.

Read the next line of coding and step to the one beyond. If the control q
switch on the sequence mechanism is in the up position and the stop
key down, the machine will stop on the line following the next 7 code.

Punch and complete punching before starting next operation. Stop the 51
machine if there is no card in punching position. :

Print and complete printing before starting next operation. Used 6
when 752 or 7521 is in the In column,

Drop out tape selection relays. 61
Automatic check, 64
Interpolator position tape to the closest lower value of the argument, 641

May replace 61,

Read into EIO counter, 741
Read into print counter I, 7432
Read into print counter II. 14321
Read into punch counter, Stop the machine if there is no card in 753

punching position,
100

Divide.

Multiply.

Logarithm.

Exponential,

Interpolate,

Sine.

Select interpolator I.

Select interpolator I.

Select interpolator II.

Print counter I half pick-up.

Read into SIO counter (read-in II, plugged).

Read out of EIO counter.

CODING

Read "h" correction into intermediate counter.

OuT

IN

MISC.

76

761

162

7621

7631

7654

76541

76542

76543

765431

8741

832

841

SUMMARY OF OPERATIONAL CODES

Non-Automatic Codes

Read out negative absolute value from storage counter,
Read out positive absolute value from storage counter.
Invert read-out of IVS or switch.

Reset IC counter.

Reset EIO counter.

Invert read-out of any storage counter or switch except IVS,
Reset SIO counter.

Invert or do not invert read-out of any storage counter or switch
(except IVS) under control of counter 70,

Punch.

Step interpolator I ahead,

Step interpolator II ahead.

Step interpolator II ahead.

Step interpolator I back.

101

OUT

IN

MISC,

21

$1

321

432

53

531

532

54

102

Step interpolator II back.

Step interpolator II back.

Pick up interpolation sequence control relay.

Reset LIO counter.

Read from card feed H.
Place limitation in division.
Place limitation in division.
Place limitation in division.
Place limitation in division.
Print on typewriter I.

Print on typewriter Tl.

Read into LIO counter,

Read into normalizing register.

CODING

ouT | IN | MISC.

541
542
62
63
632
6321
643
6431
6432
64321

752

7521

765421

8321

SUMMARY OF OPERATIONAL CODES

Special read-in for counter 64 "ganging" carry controls of counters
64 and 65.

Special read-in for counter 65 "ganging" carry controls of counters
64 and 65.

Special read-in for counter 68 "ganging" carry controls of counters
68 and 69, ,

Special read-in for counter 69 "ganging" carry controls of counters
68 and 69,

Read into SIO counter (read-in I, direct).

Read out of LIO counter (plugged read-out),

Read out.power of ten from normalizing register.

Read out of SIO counter (read-out II, plugged),

Reset print counter I.

Reset print counter II.

Reset punch counter,

Read out of IVS.

Read tape I.

Read tape II.

103

OUT IN MISC.

87
871
873
8731
874

831

8321

84

842

8421

843

8431

85

851

104

CODING

Read tape HI.
Read out of (into) columns 13-24 of counter 71 into (from) columns

13-24 of the buss.

Read out of (into) columns 13-24 of counter 71 into (from) columns
1-12 of the buss.

Low order PQ counter read-out. Read out columns 1-23 and the
algebraic sign of PQ counter. Must directly follow a high order
product-out or a quotient-out.

Read out of print counter i.

Read out of print counter II.

Read out of punch counter.

Argument control, drops off zeros to the right.

Turn on typewriter II.

Turn on typewriter I.

Turn off typewriter I.

Read out of SIO counter (read-out I, plugged),

Read out of SIO counter (read-out II, direct).

ouT

IN

MISC.

852

853

(853)

8531

(8531)

86

ao
cn
bo

8621

863

87

871

872

8731

8732

874

8741

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

105

TIMING

The unit of time employed by the machine is the cycle; 200 cycles equal one minute.

Except for certain functional operations, one line of coding corresponds to one cycle of machine
time, ,

Multiplication requires 8 + n cycles, where n is the number ofnon~zero digits inthe odd or even
columns of the multiplier whichever is the greater. Multiplication consumes a minimum of time
when the multiplier is zero: 8 cycles = 2.4 seconds, When the multiplier contains 23 non-zero
digits, maximum time is consumed: 20 cycles = 6.0 seconds.

Division requires 6 + 2n cycles, where n is the number of comparisons for which division is
plugged. Division covers a minimum of time when the operation contains but one subtract cycle:
7 4n cycles: a maximum of time when it is plugged for 23 comparisons and there are no "no
go's": 52 cycles = 15,6 seconds,

Logarithms require 114 + 8n cycles, where n is the number of comparisons for which division
is plugged. The divisions, which are a part of the logarithm sequence, are carried through 23
comparisons unless division is plugged for fewer comparisons. If division is plugged for 23
comparisons, the computation of a logarithm requires at most 298 cycles = 1,49 minutes = 89,4
seconds,

Exponentials require 172 + 2n cycles, where n is the number of comparisons for which division
is plugged. The division, which is part of the negative exponential sequence, is carried through
23 comparisons unless division is plugged for fewer comparisons. If division is plugged for 23
comparisons, the computation requires at most 218 cycles = 1,09 minutes = 65.4 seconds, If
x is known to be positive, the exponential computation is reduced to 167 cycles = 0.835 minutes
= 50.1 seconds.

Sines require 199 cycles = 1,0 minutes = 60 seconds.

Interpolation of order k

(a) Positioning time for any tape is
P = 8+ N(k+ 2)/2 cycles, maximum
where N = the number of arguments in the tape

k +1 = the number of interpolational coefficients including Cy:

(b) Computation time is
C = 7+ k(4+n') cycles
where k +1 = the number of interpolational coefficients including C 0°
If the maximum number of digits in any interpolational coefficient is 2d; i.e., even, then
n' = d. .

If the maximum number of digits in any interpolational coefficient is 2d + 1; i.e., odd, then
n'=d+l,
106
CODING

(9) Punching a card through 24 columns and resetting the punch counter requires 10 cycles.

(10) Printing and resetting the print counter requires (10c/27) + 4 cycles, where c is the number of
column selection plughubs up to and including the reset, An allowance of 23 cycles between
prints is sufficient for any printing.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

SWITCHES
No Code No. Code No. Code
1 741 21 75431 41 T651
2 742 22 75432 42 7652
3 7421 23 754321 43 76521
4 743 24 76 44 7653
5 7431 25 761 45 76531
6 7432 26 762 46 76532
7 74321 27 7621 47 765321
8 75 28 763 48 7654
9 751 29 7631 49 76541
10 752 30 7632 50 76542
11 7521 31 76321 51 765421
12 753 32 764 52 76543
13 7531 33 7641 53 765431
14 7532 34 7642 54 765432
15 75321 35 76421 55 7654321
16 754 36 1643 56 8
17 7541 37 76431 57 81
18 7542 38 76432 58 82
19 75421 39 764321 59 821
20 1543 40 765 60 83

Independent Variable Switch, IVS, Code 8431

107

In order to check the quantities inserted in switches, these should be printed out before a compu-

tation is begun,

Negative numbers are inserted in switches as complements on nine, or inserted positively and

read out using the invert code.

The number in any switch may be read into any storage counter or, under the operational codes,

into a functional counter.

To invert the read-out of any switch (except IVS), it is preferable to use the operational code 32
instead of the code 21 in the Miscellaneous column, To invert the read-out of the IVS, it is
necessary to use the operational code 21 in the Miscellaneous column,

Since the read-out codes of switches are non-automatic, they require a 7 in the Miscellaneous
column unless they are under the control of a preceding automatic code.

1. Read out sw, A into ctr. B; i.e., add sw. A into ctr. B.

2, Add minus sw, A (except IVS) into ctr. B.

3. Add IVS to ctr. B.

or

OUT IN MISC.
A B 7
B. 732
721
8431 B 7

108

(6)

(7)

(8)

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
4, Add minus IVS to ctr. B. 8431 B 721
5, Invert the read-out of sw. A (except IVS) under control A B 7432

of ctr. 70, and read into ctr. B. See Choice Counter.

If the number of constants desired for a problem exceeds the number of switches, the constants
may be read into storage counters not used in the problem by means of the IVS,

If the number of constants in a problem exceeds the number of switches, they may be placed in
a value tape (see Interpolation) or if all three interpolators are in use, they may be placed in
card feeds or in counters as suggested in note (6).

If a column of a switch is set on either of the blank positions between "0" and "9",numbers will
not be read out of that switch column either normally or with an invert code. For example of

eee WV een, wee. ene See Fe:

use, see Logarithm In-Out Counter, example 6.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

109

STORAGE COUNTERS

No Code No. Code No. Code
1 1 , 25 541 49 651
2 2 26 542 50 652
3 21 | 29 5421 51 6521
4 3 28 543 : 52 653
5 31 29 5431 53 6531
6 32 30 5432 54 6532
vi 321 31 54321 55 65321
8 4 32 6 56 654
9 41 33 61 57 6541
10 42 34 62 58 6542
11 421 35 621 59 65421
12 43 36 63 60 6543
13 431 37 631 61 65431
14 432 38 632 62 65432
15 4321 39 6321 63 654321
16 5 40 64 64 “7
17 51 41 641 65 71
18 52 42 642 66 72
19 521 43 6421 67 721
20 53 44 643 68 73
21 531 45 6431 69 731
22 532 46 6432 70 732
23 5321 47 64321 71 7321
24 54 48 | 65 72 74

The number in any storage counter may be read into any other storage counter or, under the
operational codes, into a functional counter,

It is good practice to reset a storage counter just before using it. This frequently avoids the
necessity of starting tapes and preserves quantities in the machine as long as possible,

Counters 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, 71 and 72 are wired for special operations, These extra uses do
not invalidate their use as normal storage counters, The details of these extra functions will be
dealt with in sections concerning these counters,

The LIO and SIO counters may be used as normal storage counters and as special counters for
the addition of positive quantities and the shifting of quantities to the right or left, In any case,
they require special codes and plugging. See Logarithm In-Out Counter and Sine In-Out Counter,

Since the read-out and read-in codes of the storage counters are non-automatic, they require a
” in the Miscellaneous column unless they are under the control of a previous automatic oper-
ational code.

Since the print and punch counters have complete sets of carry controls, including end around
carries, quantities may be read into them as into any storage counter except that their read-in
codes are automatic and must not be followed by a 7 in the Miscellaneous column, The read-in
to the punch counter must not be interposed in multiplication or division. See Printing and Card
Punch,

OUT IN MISC.

1. Addctr. Atoctr. B. A B q

110

CODING

Add minus ctr. A to ctr. B.

Invert the read-out of ctr. A under control of ctr. 70
and read into ctr. B. See Choice Counter. ;
Add absolute value of ctr. A to ctr. B.

Add minus absolute value of ctr. A to ctr. B.

Reset ctr. A.

ouT | IN | MISC.
A B 732
Ja B 7432
A B 72
A B 7
A A 7

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

111

MULTIPLICATION

Multiplication requires plugging to care for the decimal point. See Plugging Instructions.

Numbers may not be read into the multiplying unit from card feeds,

‘The multiplicand, MC, and the multiplier, MP, may be interchanged without affecting the value

of the product, The number having the fewer non-zero digits should be used as the multiplier..

The read-out of a product may not be inverted. In order to read out a negative product, invert
either the multiplicand or the multiplier.

The product may be read out to a print counter or to the punch counter,

Two lines of coding, not involving the intermediate counter, may be interposed between the read-
in of MC and the read-in of MP, When operations are thus interposed, a 7 is required in the
Miscellaneous column of the line containing the read-in of MC.

If only one line is interposed between MC and MP, it must not contain an automatic code (or a
7 in the Miscellaneous column),

If two lines are interposed between MC and MP, the first must and the second may contain an
automatic code (or a 7 in the Miscellaneous column),

3 +n lines of coding, not involving the intermediate counter, may be interposed between the
read-in of MP and the read-out of the product. Here n is equal to the number of non-zero
digits in the odd or even columns of MP, whichever is the greater, Where operations are thus
interposed, a 7 is required in the Miscellaneous column of the line containing the read-in of
MP,

If only one line is interposed between MP and the read-out of the product, it must not contain
an automatic code (or a 7 in the Miscellaneous column),

If two or more lines are interposed between MP and the read-out of the product, all but the last
line must contain automatic codes (or 7's in the Miscellaneous column), The line preceding the
read-out of the product must not contain an automatic code.

If a zero MP is possible, no more than three cycles may be interposed between the read-in of
MP and the read-out of the product.

Card feeding, reading into the punch counter or the check procedure may be interposed in multi-
plication only when the coding is specially arranged, See Interposition of Machine Stops.

"Print and complete printing" or "punch and complete punching" should in general not be inter-
posed in multiplication,

OUT IN MISC.

1. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the A 761
product to ctr. C.

112

a
.

CODING

Multiply minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A by sw. or cir. B
and deliver the product to ctr. C.

Multiply sw. or ctr. A by minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. B
and deliver the product to ctr. C.

Multiply the absolute value of ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and
deliver the product to ctr. C.

Multiply sw. or ctr. A by minus IVS and deliver the
product to ctr. C.

Muitipiy sw. or cir. A by sw. or ctr. B, read the product
to print ctr. I and print on typewriter I.

Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
product to ctr. C. Interpose one addition between MC
and MP.

ouT | IN | MISC.
A 761 32
B
Cc 7
A 761
B 32
Cc 7
761 2
c 1
A 761
2431 21
Cc 7
A 764
B
7432
752 7
7161 7
E
B
Cc 7

10.

11,

12.

MULTIPLICATION

Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
product to ctr. C. Interpose one subtraction between
MC and MP,

Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
product to ctr. C. Interpose two additions between MC
and MP,

Multiply minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A by sw. or ctr.
B and deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose an addition
and a subtraction between MC and MP. Turn on type-
writer I.

Multiply the absolute value of ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and
deliver the product to ctr. C. Read from ctr. D to print
ctr, I and print on typewriter I with argument control
between MC and MP.

Multiply the negative absolute value of ctr. A by minus
sw. (except IVS) or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr.
C. Step and read from value tape on interpolator I to ctr.
D, between MC and MP. Turn on typewriter I and turn
off typewriter IT.

113

OUT IN MISC.

761 7
E 32
Cc 7

A 761 7

D E T

F G

B
Cc 7

A 761 732

D E 7

F G 32

B

872 Cc 7
761 72
7432

87 752

B
Cc 7

A 761 71

85 753

872 D

Continued on next page
114

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
12. (continued) B «4382
8731 c 7
13. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the A 761 . qT
product to ctr. C. Step the value tape on interpolator I
. twice between MC and MP. Step and read from the tape 753
to ctr. D and then step twice more between MP and the
read-out of the product. Turn off typewriter I. 53
B 7
85 753
D 7
8732 753
53
c 7
i4. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or cir. B and deliver the A 761
product to ctr. C. Interpose one addition between MP
and read-out of product. B vi
E
vi
i5. Muitipiy sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B, reset ctr. C and A T6i
deliver the product to ctr. C.
B 7
c jc
Cc 7
16. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or cir. B and deliver the A 761
product to ctr. C. Interpose two additions and two sub-
tractions between MP and read-out of product. B q
D E 7

Continued on next page
MULTIPLICATION

16. (continued)

17,

18.

Multiply sw. or cir. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
product to ctr. C. Interpose a step and read from a
value tape on interpolator I between MC and MP. Inter-
pose a step and read from a value tape on interpolator I
and an addition and a reset between MP and read-out of
product,

Multiply plus or minus the quantity in sw. (except IVS)
or ctr. A under control of ctr. 70 by sw. or ctr. B and
deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose two additions
between MC and MP. Interpose a print, reset of ctr. 70
and addition of an absolute value to ctr. 70 between MP
and read-out of product.

115

our | ww | misc.
E 7
H 732
J 32
Cc 7
A 71 = 17
85 753
D
B 7
85 753
E 7
F G 7
C Cc
c 7
A 761 | 7432
D E 7
D F
B 7
G 7432
152 «(7
732 «|732) «(7
H 732 © ©|2
c 7

116

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
19. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by the absolute value of ctr. B and A 761 7
deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose read-in and read-
out of LIO between MC and MP. Interpose reset of LIO, D 765421 |7
a print and addition of negative absolute value between MP
and read-out of product. 831 E
B | 72
763
E 7432
152 7
F G 1
Cc 7
20. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the A 761 7
product to ctr. C. Interpose a print between MC and MP.
Interpose reset of ctr. C and read-in, read-out and reset D 7432
of SIO between MP and read-out of product.
752
B q
c Cc 7
E 8741 7
8741 F 7
321
c 7

(ii) If necessary, the biank in column of the Line of coding reading the MD may he used to read the
MP simultaneously to a storage counter, to a print counter or to initiate printing.

OUT IN MISC.
21. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or cir. B, simultaneously A 761 vi
reading B to C and read the product to D. Note that this
may not be used to reset ctr. B. Print G between read- G 7432
ing of A and B. Interpose 4 cycles between read-in of
MP and read-out of product. 752

Continued on next page

MULTIPLICATION

21. (continued)

22. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by B + C, print G and deliver the
product to ctr. D. Interpose other operations.

23. Multiply sw. or ctr, A by sw. or ctr. B, print B and deliver
the product to ctr. C. Reset ctr. C during multiplication,
Interpose other operations.

117

out | mw | misc.
B Cc 7
85 753
E 7
85 753
D 7
A 761 7
Cc B 7
G 7432
B 752 «(7
85 753
E 7
85 753
D 7
A 71 = (|?
D~~—s lp 7
E E
B 1432
152 «|?
c 1
F D 32
7

118

CODING
OUT In MISC.
24, Multiply sw. or ctr. A by B which is read from a value A 761 7
tape. Simultaneously read B to ctr. B and deliver the
product to ctr.C. Reset ctr, C during multiplication. D D q
Note line containing reset of D must be included if only
as line (blank, blank, 7). 85
B 7
Cc
Cc 7
25. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by B which is read from a value A 761 7
. tape. Deliver the product to ctr. C. Turn on both type-
writers, Interpose other adding and reset cycles. D D 7
85
871 7
G G 7
D 7
E G
872 c 7

(i2) If necessary, the biank Gui column of the line of coding reading out the product may be used to
select a value tape from which the value is read on the next line, or for turning typewriters on
and off.

OUT IN MISC.

26, Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the A 761
product to ctr. C. Read the value from a tape on interpo- '
lator I to ctr. D.

85 Cc 7
D 7
27, Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the A 761
product to ctr. C. Read D from a tape on interpolator I
and multiply it by sw. or ctr, E and deliver this product B

to ctr. F. Turn off both typewriters.
Continued on next page
(13)

MULTIPLICATION

27. (continued)

119

OUT IN MISC,
85 Cc 7
8731 761
E
8732 F 7

If necessary, the codes for punching and for stepping an interpolator may be placed in the
Miscellaneous column of the lines of coding reading the MP and MC if these lines do not al-
ready contain an invert or other operational code. These codes may also be added in the line

of coding reading out the product,

28. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by the absolute value of ctr. B.
Add A to C and print C with half pick-up on typewriter I.
Step the tape on interpolator I four times and read the
value to D. Step the tape twice more. Reset ctr. C.
Deliver the product to ctr. P and punch out the quantity
in the punch ctr. Turn on typewriter II.

OUT IN MISC,

A 761 753

A Cc 753

Cc 7432 53

B 76543 = |'72

85 752 753
753

Cc 53

871 75

120

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)
(7)

on
iss}
or

o_
to
—

(10)

DIVISION

Division does not require plugging to care for the decimal point,
The "Divide N minus Decimal" switch must be set to the value,
N = 22-K

where K is the number of columns to the right of the decimal point, If the decimal point lies
between columns 23 and 24, division may be performed by setting the "Divide N minus Decimal"
switch to zero and shifting the quotient one column to the left via LIO counter or SIO counter.
There will, however, be no more than 22 decimal places in the result,

The first number read to the dividing unit in the first line of division coding is the divisor, DR,

Numbers may not be read into the dividing unit from the card feeds,

The read-out of a quotient may not be inverted, In order to read out a negative quotient, invert
either the divisor, DR, or the dividend, DD,

The quotient may be read out to a print counter or to the punch counter,

The degree of accuracy in division may be controlled by operational codes and plugging. See
Plugging Instructions, The accuracies available vary with the plugging from one to twenty-three
columns, For a given problem five different accuracies may be selected in this range. If only
one accuracy is needed in a given problem, no code need be used; i.e., the Miscellaneous column
is "blank", The operational codes of the accuracies are placed in the Miscellaneous column
with either DRor DD read-in or on the lines interposed betweenthem, The codes are 643, 6431,
6432, 64321 and "blank", These codes may not be used in combination with an invert or other
operational code, The degree of accuracy of division within the logarithm and exponential units
is controlled by the plugging of the "blank" code. Not more than 23 digits of any quotient, in-
cluding the first "no go" if any, can be read out of the PQ counter,

Two lines of coding, not invoiving the intermediate counter, may be interposed between the
read-in of DR and the read-in of DD. When operations are thus interposed, a 7 is required in
the Miscellaneous column of the line containing the read-in of DR,

If only one line is interposed between DR and DD, it must not contain an automatic code (ora?
in the Miscellaneous column),

if two lines of coding are interposed between DR and DD, the first must and the second may con-
tain an automatic code (or a 7 in the Miscellaneous column),

it is possible to interpose n+ 1 nes of coding, not involving the muitipiy-divide unit, between
the read-in of DD and the read-out of the quotient, Here n is equal to the number of compari-
sons for which division is plugged. Where operations are thus interposed, a 7 is required in
the Miscellaneous column of the line containing the read-in of DD,

If only one line is interposed between DD and the read-out of the quotient, it must not containan
automatic code (or a 7 in the Miscellaneous column),

If two or more lines are interposed between DD and the read-out of the quotient, all but the last
line must contain automatic codes (or 7's in the Miscellaneous column), The line preceding the
read-out of the quotient must not contain an automatic code,

Card feeding, reading to the punch counter or the check procedure may be interposed in division
only when the coding is specially arranged. See Interposition of Machine Stops,
121

DIVISION

(11) "Print and complete printing" or "punch and complete punching" should in general not be in-
terposed in division,

OUT IN MISC.
1. Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the B 76
quotient to ctr. C.
Cc 7
2. Divide minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A by sw. or cir. B 76
B and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.
32
Cc 7
3. Divide sw. or ctr. A by minus sw. {except IVS) or ctr. B 76 32
B and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.
A
Cc 7
4. Divide the absolute value of ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and B 76
deliver the quotient to ctr. C.
A 2
Cc 7
5. Divide sw. or ctr. A by minus IVS and deliver the 8431 76 21
quotient to ctr. C.
A
Cc 7
6. Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B with accuracy B 76 6431
6431 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. :
A
Cc 7
or B 76
6431
Cc 7

122

11.

12.

CODING

Divide minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr, A by sw. or ctr. B
with accuracy 6432 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by minus sw, (except IVS) or ctr. B
with accuracy 64321 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and read the quotient
to print ctr. I and print on typewriter I.

Divide sw, or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B with accuracy 643 and
deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Interpose one addition be-
tween DR and DD. Turn on typewriter I.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Interpose one subtraction between
DR and DD.

Divide sw. or cir. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Interpose two additions between DR
and DD.

ouT.!| IN MISC.
B 16 6432
A 32
c 7
B 76 32
A 64321
c 7
76
7432
52 7
B 76 7643
D E
A
872 c 7
16 v1
E 32
Cc 7
76 7
D E 7
G

Continued on next page

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

DIVISION

(continued)

Divide minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B
with accuracy 6431 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. In-
terpose an addition and a subtraction between DR and DD.

Divide the absolute value of ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and
deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Read from ctr. D to print
ctr. I and print on typewriter I between DR and DD.

Divide the negative absolute value of ctr. A by minus sw.
(except IVS) or ctr. B and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.

Step and read from value tape on interpolator I to ctr. D
between DR and DD.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B with accuracy 6432
and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Step the value tape on
interpolator I twice between DR and DD, read from the
tape and step twice more between DD and the read-out of
the quotient.

123

OUT IN MISC.
A
Cc 7
B 76 76431
D 7
F G 32
A 32
Cc 7
76 7
7432
752
A 2
Cc 7
B 76 732
85 753
D
A 1
Cc 7
B 76 76432
753
53
A 7
85 7

Continued on next page
124

16.

17.

18.

19.

CODING

(continued)

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B with accuracy 64321
and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Interpose one addition
between DD and the read-out of the quotient.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Reset ctr. C between DD and the read-
out of the quotient.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Interpose eight adding and resetting
operations between DD and the read-out of the quotient.

our IN MISC.
D 7
753
53

Cc 7
76 64321

A 7

D E
Cc 7

B 76

A q

c c
Cc 7

B 76

A 7

D E 7

D F 7

D G 7

H H q

I I 7

J J 7

D H 72

A H zZ
Cc T

125

DIVISION
OUT IN MISC.
20. Divide plus or minus the quantity in ctr. A under control B 76 7643
of ctr. 70 by sw. or ctr. B, with accuracy 643, and deliver
the quotient to ctr. C. Interpose two additions between DR D E q
and DD. Interpose a print of ctr. A under control of ctr.
70, reset of ctr. 70, addition of an absolute value to ctr. D E
70 and addition of ctr. G to ctr. 70 between DD and read-
out of quotient. A 7432
A 7432 432
152 7
732 332 7
F 732 72
G 132
Cc 7
21. Divide sw. or ctr. A by the absolute value of ctr. B with B 76 72
accuracy 6431 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Inter-
pose a print of ctr. A between DR and DD. Interpose a A 7432
read-in, read-out and reset of LIO and additions into LIO
between DD and read-out of quotient. 752
A 76431
D 765421 |7
831 E 7
763
765421 |7
G 765421
Cc 7

(12) If necessary, the blank In column of the line of coding reading the DD may be used to read the
DD simultaneously to a storage counter, to a print counter or to initiate printing,

our | IN | Misc,

22, Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B, with accuracy 6432, B 76 6432
simultaneously reading A to C and deliver the quotient to

ctr. D, Note that this may not be used to reset A. A Cc

Continued on next page
126

CODING

22. (continued)

23.

24,

25.

or

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Print A with half pick-up between
DR and DD. This operation may also be coded by omit-
ting the first 7 and the second A.

Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the
quotient to ctr. C. Print A. Reset ctr. C during di-

vision. The number of cycles interposed between the
read-in of DD and the read-out of the quotient is de-
pendent upon the division accuracy plugging.

Divide A, which is read from a value tape, by sw. or
ctr. B and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. Simultaneously
read A to ctr. A. Reset ctr. C between DR and DD. The
number of cycles interposed between the read-in of DD
and the read-out of the quotient is dependent upon the
division accuracy plugging.

OUT IN MISC.
D 7
B 76
6432
D 7
B 76 7
A 7432
76543
A 752
c 7
B 76
A 7432
752 q
D E 7
Cc Cc 7
F E 732
G E 7
A G
Cc 7
B 76 7
Cc 7
85
A 7
D D 7

Continued on next page

127

DIVISION
OUT IN MISC.
25. (continued) E D
vi
26. Divide A, which is read from a value tape, by sw. or ctr. B 76 7
B and deliver the quotient to ctr. C. The number of cycles
interposed between the read-in of DD and the read-out of D D q
the quotient is dependent upon the division accuracy plug-
ging. 85
7
G G 7
D 7
E G
c 7
27. Divide A, which is read from a value tape, by minus ctr. B 76 732
B with accuracy 6432 and deliver the quotient to ctr. C.
The number of cycles interposed between the read-in of D D vi
DD and the read-out of the quotient is dependent upon the
division accuracy plugging. 85
76432
G G 7
E D 7
E G 7
F G
Cc 7

(13) If necessary, the blank Out column of the line of coding reading out the quotient may be used to
Select a value tape from which the value is read on the next line or for turning typewriters on
and off.

OUT IN MISC.

28. Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the B 76
quotient to ctr.C. Read value from tape on interpo-
lator I to ctr. D. ;

Continued on next page
128

CODING
OUT IN MISC,
28, (continued) 85 Cc 7
D 7
29. Divide sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B and deliver the B 76
quotient to ctr. C. Read D from a tape on interpolator I
and multiply it by sw. or ctr. E, deliver this product to
ctr. F. Turn off typewriter I.
85 Cc 7
761
E

(14) If necessary, the codes for punching and for stepping an interpolator may be placed in the
Miscellaneous column of the lines of coding reading the DR and DD if these lines do not al-
ready contain an invert or other operational code, These codes may also be added in the line
of coding reading out the quotient.

OUT IN MISC,

30. Divide minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. B by sw. or ctr. A A 76 643
with accuracy 643, deliver the quotient to ctr. C and punch
out the quantity in the punch ctr. Turn on typewriter I. B 32

872 Cc 715

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

129

CHOICE COUNTER

Counter 70

The special controls on counter 70 make it possible to reverse the algebraic sign of a quantity
if and only if some second quantity standing in counter 70 is negative (including the quantity .
minus zero),

OUT IN MISC.

1. Invert the read-out of sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A to ctr. B A B 7432
if and only if the quantity standing in ctr. 70 is negative.

Counter 70 may be used to roundoff numbers to n places of accuracy byaddition or subtraction
of 5x 10-(a+1 according as the given number is positive or negative, The resulting number
may then be printed with the (n+ 1)st, (n+ 2)nd, ... places cut off by typewriter plugging. This
may Substitute for the half pick-up discussed under Printing.

OUT IN MISC.

2. Round off the number in ctr. A to n places, where A 732 7
5x 10-+ 1) is in sw. B and print on typewriter I.
B 732 7432
732 7432
752 7

For punched cards not to be fed to the machine for further computation, counter 70 may be used
to round off to n places of accuracy as in note (2). The extra places are cut off by punch plug-
ging. If the cards are to be fed to the machine for further computation, 5 x 10-(™+ 1) must be
added in all cases, See Multiple In-Out Counter, note (6),

Any computation involving an odd function f(x) = - f(-x), may be simplified by use of counter
70, For example, if sin x is to be computed by interpolation, the functional tape need only be
punched for positive arguments, the quantity x read to counter 70 and the result of interpolation
read out of a storage counter under control of counter 70. See Interpolators.

The choice counter may be used to compute various types of discontinuous functions and functions
with discontinuous derivatives. Suppose it is desired to compute

F(x) = £1 (x), Xa,

F(x) = f(x), a<x,
Calculate

8, =f +h

Bg = fg -fy

and store x - a in counter 70,
Compute 2F(x) = 8, * 8g under control of counter 70.
Thus if x=<a,x-a=-0,

F(x) = £,@) = (8, - B5)/2 .
130

CODING

If x>a, x-a>0,

F(x) = fo{x) = (g, + 8,)/2.

Repetition of this process will care for functions with any desired number of discontinuities,
or discontinuities of their derivatives,

Suppose
F(x) = £,@), | xa,
F(x) = £,@), a<x<b,
F(x) = £,(x), b<x,
Calculate
Sy stg +h
82 = fg - fy

and store x - a in counter 70.

Compute 2F (x) = 8, + 8» under control of counter 70,

Calculate
ry Ff PB
53° *3 7 *41
84 =f, - Fy

and store x - b in counter 70.
Compute 2F(x) = 83+ 8q under control of counter 70,

While this is the basic coding for such functions, in many cases it is possbile to shorten the
calculation depending upon the form of the functions,
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

131

AUTOMATIC CHECK COUNTER

Counter 72

The special controls on this counter insure that the absolute value of.a given number is less than
another given positive number or tolerance. If this condition is not satisfied, the machine is
stopped.

OUT IN MISC.
1. To check the absolute value of the quantity in ctr. A against B 74 q
the positive tolerance in sw. or ctr. B.
A 74 71
74 74 64
2. To insure that +0 =A < B, check the quantity in ctr. A B 74 7
against the positive tolerance in sw. or ctr. B.
A 74 732
74 74 64

The first line of the check coding may be separated from the other two.

The last two lines of the check coding may not be separated, The machine stops on the line fol-
lowing a 64 code unless in the preceding cycle there is an end around carry in counter 72,

The last line of the check coding includes the reset of the check counter as well as the 64 code
for the check operation, It is possible incase of necessity to omit the reset of the check counter
and use this space for another reset or an addition. In this eventuality the check counter must
be reset before using it again,

Itis always desirable to print out the quantity being checked before it is routed through the check
counter, Thus in case of failure to check, the magnitude and type of error readily may be ob-
served,

If possible, all essential parts of a computation should be preserved in the machine until the
check has been made. Thus in case of machine error, the elements can be read out and manual
computation used to aid in detecting the error,

The consumption of machine time must enter into the choice of checking methods, [If a final
check can be devised for an entire computation when the time is half an hour or less per run,
intervening check computations may well be omitted. If each element of out~put is independent,
each should be checked, If a run continues more than half an hour, checks should be inserted at
intermediate points,

The most commonly used methods of checking are:

(a) Inverse Operation
If y = f(x) is computed, then a check of x - x'!, where x! = tly), against a preassigned
tolerance will in general give an adequate check, If y = x!/2 is computed by iteration or
logarithms, n being an integer, then x - x', where x' = y2 as computed by multiplication,
is a check making use of distinct machine processes,

(b) Independent Caiculation
In some cases it is possible to derive two independent methods of computing f(x) which
may be checked against each other.

132

(9)

(10)

(ce)

(a)

(e)

(f)

CODING

Interchange of Counters

if no brief method of check can be devised, the computation may be repeated using differ-
ent storage or functional counters, In checking multiplication, the multiplier and multiplicand
may be interchanged, The problem may be rerun witha different decimal point or with
certain values multiplied or divided by powers of ten, This will shift digits into different
columns of the storage and functional counters,

Identities
In many cases functions satisfy certain identities or recursion formulae which may be used
as checks, For example, the computation of sin x and cos x may be checked by:

2

sin” x + cos x-1=0,

It should be noted, however, that this particular identity will not detect compensating errors.

Differences
Standard differencing techniques provide a basic method of checking, If one of the higher

differences of a function conforms to a certain pattern, a check is provided, Naturally, the

use of differencing techniques depends upon the amount of information available concerning

the function and its differences,

Gross Checks
Observation of the trend of a function and rough differencing, together with graphing, will in
many cases provide gross checks,

The checking of value and functional tapes, cards and printed data is considered in their re-
spective sections, See Design of Functional Tapes, Card Feeds, Card Punch and Printing.

if the choice counter is used in conjunction with the check procedure, it is possible to deter-
mine whether or not two given quantities having the same sign differ by not more than one

in a given significant digit.

OUT IN MISC.
If the quantities A, 10000 > A 21, and B, lying in ctrs. A 732 71
A and B, are of the same sign, the following coding will
insure that A and B differ by less than one in the fifth ST 732 732
significant digit. Ctrs. C, 70 and 72 are reset and
available for computation. SW Cc q
Switch ST = 10
su = 90 Sx Cc 7432
SV = 900
SW = 9.05005 SU 732 732
SX = 0.00045
SY = 0.0045 SY c 7432
SZ = 0.045
, sv 732 732
SZ Cc 7432
A B 732
Cc 74 7
B 74 71
64

(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

133

MULTIPLE IN-OUT COUNTER

This counter is equipped with multiple in-out relays as follows:

(a) From columns 1-24 of the buss into columns 1-24 of the counter in normal position, code
7321 in the In column, ,

(b) From columns 1-24 of the counter into columns 1-24 of the buss in normal position, code
7321 in the Out column,

(c) From columns 13-24 of the buss into columns 13-24 of the counter, code 853 in the In
column,

(d) From columns 13-24 of the counter into columns 13-24 of the buss, code 853 in the Out
column,

(e) From columns 1-12 of the buss into columns 13-24 of the counter, code 8531 in the In
column,

(f) From columns 13-24 of the counter into columns 1-12 of the buss, code 8531 in the Out
column,

Columns 13-24 of the MIO counter may be reset using the code 853 in the Out and In columns,

The effect of this counter is to double the number of storage counters in the machine, each
storage counter having a capacity of 12 columns, Essentially, only the upper half is used in
this process, since there is no special read-out of the lower 12 columns. The lower half of
MIO may not be used for adding negative numbers, since there is no carry from column 12
to column 1, All adding which involves any negative numbers must be done in the upper half
of the counter, which is supplied with a special carry from column 24 to column 13,

If both of the numbers stored in a counter by means of the MIO counter are positive, they may
be simultaneously multiplied by a third positive quantity, This process is frequently of use in
dealing with statistical data,

The special controls on counter 71 do not invalidate its use in the normal manner, when the
code 7321 is used.

OUT IN MISC.

1, Sw. A and sw. B each contain two numbers, one in cols. 1-12, |'7321 7321 7
and the other in cols. 13-24, cols, 12 and 24 containing the

algebraic sign, It is required to add together the numbers A 853
in corresponding columns of the two switches and deliver
the two sums to ctr, C in corresponding columns, Both B 853 7
sums are to be printed in cols, 1-12 by typewriter I,
853 Cc 7
8531 7432
52

7321 7321 7

A 8531 q

Continued on next page
134

(6)

“sy

~~

CODING
OUT IN MISC,
1. (continued) ; B 8531 vi
8531 Cc 7
8531 7432
752 6

The MIO counter may be used to round off numbers to be punched in cards, The number is
shifted by the LIO counter so that the columns to be punched appear in columns 13-24 of the
MIO counter, Two cases then arise depending on whether the cards are to be used in further
calculations or not,

(a) If the cards are not to be used in further calculations in the machine, but simply printed
out or used for checking purposes, a five is added or subtracted from the 12th column ac-
cording as the number is positive or negative under the control of counter 70, Columns
13-24 of the MIO counter are read to the punch counter.

OUT IN MISC.

2, The number in ctr. A is to be rounded off and punched in A 732 vi
cols, 1-12 of a card. Sw. B contains a five in col. 12.

A 765421 |7

831 7321 7

B 7321 7432

853 753

51

(b) If the cards are to be fed to the machine for use in further calculations, a five is added
in the 12th machine column, Columns 13-24 of the MIO counter are read to the punch

memset ne
coumer,

OUT IN MISC.
3. The number in ctr, Ais to be rounded off and punched in A 765421 17
cols, 1-12 of a card for further computation. Sw. B
contains a five in col. 12. 831 7321 7
B 7321 7
853 753
51

The MIC counter may be used tc produce seria! numbers for sorting punched cards. A deck
is to be punched with values of several functions; e.g., f(x), g(x), h(x), in the order fG,. ),
etx 4), h(x ,); f(x), g(x), h(x), f(x ,), B(x y)s hx 4) etc, The cards are later be
(8)

MULTIPLE IN-OUT COUNTER

135

sorted according to the magnitude of the first four digits of f(x), There are not more than eleven
significant digits in each of the functions to be punched, The functions are sent to columns 13-
24 of the MIO counter, The first four columns of f(x) are selected by routing through the LIO —
counter to columns 6-9 of the MIO counter, The serial numbers within the group are delivered
from an accumulation counter to the low order columns of the MIO counter, Columns 1-24 of

the MIO counter are then delivered to the punch counter, Thus if

f(x) = 23,137 564 76
g(x) = 0.249 301 24
h(x) = 1,656 837 96,

the three cards punched will read,

0 023 137 564 760 002 313 000 01
0 000 247 301 240 002 313 000 02
0 001 656 837 960 002 313 000 03.

4, Read g(x) from ctr. A to cols, 13-24 of MIO, Read the
first four digits of f(x) from ctr, B via LIO to cols, 6-9
of MIO, Read the serial number within the group from
ctr. C and punch the cards.

OUT IN MISC...
A 853 7
B 765421 | 7
831 7321 7
Cc 7321 7
7321 753
51

The MIO counter may be used to drop off digits to the left; i.e., columns 1-12 of a number may
be retained. See also Logarithm In-Out Counter, note (4), and Sine In-Out Counter, note (4),

(a) If the number is positive, read it into the MIO counter with the columns to be dropped in

columns 13-24, Reset columns 13-24 of MIO,

5. Read the number in ctr, A to MIO. Reset cols. 13-24 of
MIO. Read result to ctr. B.

ouT | IN | MISC.
A 7321 «1/7
853 853 7
7321 IB 7

(b) If the sign of the number A is unknown, read it into the MIO counter with the columns to
be dropped in columns 13-24, Reset columns 13-24 of MIO, Read columns 1-12 of MIO
direct to B. Supply nines when needed with negative numbers by reading columns 13-24

of MIO to B under control of counter 70,

6. Read the number in ctr. A to MIO. Reset cols, 13-24 of
MIO. Read result to ctr. B. Supply nines when needed
with negative numbers by reading cols. 13-24 of MIO to
ctr. B under control of ctr. 70,

OUT IN MISC.
A 7321 7
853 853 7

Continued on next page
136

6.

(continued)

CODING

ouT | IN | MISC.
7321 «|B 7
A 732 0«|7
353 «1B 7432

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

137

LOGARITHM IN-OUT COUNTER

The logarithm in-out counter, LIO counter, may be used as a storage counter if necessary. It
requires certain special codes, and plugging. See Plugging Instructions.

OUT IN MISC.
1, Read from ctr. A into LIO. A 765421 17
2, Read from LIO into ctr. B. Plugged read-out. 831 B 7
3. Reset LIO. — «| 763

The LIO counter may not be used for addition unless all of the numbers involved are positive,
since this counter has no end around carry.

The LIO counter maybe used to shift numbers to the right or left, since it has a pluggable read-
out to the buss. If negative numbers are involved, they may not be shifted more than ten columns
to the right on reading out, since only ten nines are available to be plugged in at the left. See
Plugging Instructions.

The LIO counter may be used to drop off digits to the right or left, since it has a pluggable read-
out, Care must be taken to supply nines in dropping digits from negative numbers, See Plug-
ging Instructions.

If it is desired to superpose numbers, the LIO counter may be used to shift one of them, See
Plugging Instructions, A and B are two arguments with the same decimal point, Superpose B
on A to prepare for printing both arguments in one typing operation, If A = 27 and B = 32, the
combination is printed as 32000027 in one typing operation.

OUT IN MISC.

4, Shift the number in ctr. B and superpose it on the number in |B 765421 |7
ctr. A. Print on typewriter I.
831 A 7
A 7432 63
752 7

The LIO counter may be used as a "doubling" counter to build up simple multiples of a posi-
tive quantity, especially products by powers of two, These operations may be interposed in
other multiplications or in division.

OUT IN MISC.

5, x liesinctr. A. Read 8x toctr. B. A 765421 |7

831 765421 |7

Continued on next page
138

CODING

OUT IN | MISC.

5. (continued) 831 765421 |7

831 765421 [7

831 B 7

(7) The LIO counter reset does not involve the buss.

(8) If more than ten nines are needed for reading out negative numbers from the LIO counter they
may be supplied from a switch under control of the choice counter, If 13 nines are needed in
columns 11-23, ten of them are supplied by plugging to ten columns, say 14-23, and three are
supplied from a switch to columns 11-13.

OUT IN MISC.

§, Read x from ctr, Ato cir. B, shifting 12 columnsto . A 765421 117
right. Sw. P has 000 in cols. 11-13. The other columns
of sw. P (cols. 1-10 and 14-24) are set on the blank 831 B 7
position (not zero), Nines are plugged to cols, 14-23.
The algebraic sign, col. 24, is bottle-plugged as usual. B 732 7

Pp B 7432

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

139

SINE IN-OUT COUNTER

The sine in-out counter, SIO counter, may be used as a storage counter if necessary. It re-
quires certain special codes and plugging, See Plugging Instructions.

The SIO counter should not be used independently of the sine computation unless the "85-1 PU."
switch is in the off position, This switch is at the left hand end of row 21 of the Multiply-Divide
relay panel, If the switch is thrown off, it should be entered in the log, since it is necessary
that the relay be in operation for a sine computation.

OUT IN MISC.

1, Read out of ctr. A into SIO. Direct read-in I, no carry; A 874 7
may not be used for doubling.

2, Read out of ctr. A into SIO. Plugged read-in II, with A 8741
carry in all columns except from col, 23 to col. 24 and
col. 24 to col. 1, Automatic Code.

If the "SIO-OUT-2 Invert Control" switch is in the on position, a nine in the 24th column will
pick up nines from the ten left hand plughubs of row 40 of the functional plugboard and will in-
vert the read-out of those columns of SIO which are plugged to the buss, If the "SIO-OUT-2
Invert Control" switch is in the off position, a nine in the 24th column will pick up nines from
the plugboard, but the read-out from the SIO will be direct,

ouT | IN | Misc.

3. Read out of SIO into ctr. B. Plugged read-out I. 84 B 7

The plugged read-out I reads directly from the SIO counter, through the plug wires, into the
buss and will not pick up nines from row 40 of the plugboard.

OUT IN MISC.

4, Read out of SIO into ctr. B. Plugged read-out I, no nines. 874 B 7

The direct read-out II is completely independent of all plugging.

5. Read out of SIO into ctr. B. Direct read-out III. 8741 B 7

The SIO counter reset, a Miscellaneous code, does not involve the buss and may therefore be
added to any line of coding not already containing a Miscellaneous code,

OUT IN MISC,

6. Reset SIO. ; 7321

140

(7)

(8)

CODING

The SIO counter may not be used for addition unless all of the quantities involved are positive
and plugged read-in II is used, since this counter has no carry into the 24th column and no end

around carry.

The SIO counter may be used to shift positive numbers to the right or left, since it has a plug-
gable read-in from the buss and two pluggable read-outs to the buss,

OUT IN MISC.
7. Shift the positive quantity standing in cols, 13, 14, 15 A 874 vi
and 16 of ctr. A to cols. 3, 4, 5 and 6 of ctr. B. :
84 B 7
or A 874 7
874 B 7
or A 8741
8741 B 7

pluggable read-out which supplies nines,

OUT IN MISC.

8. The last five digits of the quantity standing in ctr. A A 874 7
contain the code numbers controlling the punched
cards, It is desired to read the function to ctr. B 874 B 7

and the code to ctr. C.

co
ey
Q
“a

The SIO counter may be used as a "doubling" counter to build up simple multiples of a positive
quantity, especially products by powers of two, if plugged read-in II is used. These operations

ee oe 4412-42. 7 <t=

may be interposed in other multiplications or in divisions.

OUT IN MISC.

9. x liesinctr, A. Read 4x to ctr. B. A 8741
8741 8741
8741 8741

8741 B 7

SINE IN-OUT COUNTER

(11) The SIO may be used with the normalizing register to shift
sition in the machine to read out of columns 20 and up.

141

quantities from the standard po-
This must be done to facilitate the

printing of the argument of a function in the required columns to conform with the read-out of

the exponent computed in the normalizing register.

10, Ctr. A contains the argument x with decimal point in
the operating position between cols. 15 and 16. Shift
x so that it will be printed with decimal point between
cols, 19 and 20, and print on typewriter I.

OUT IN MISC.
A 874 7
874 7432
752 7

142

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

Counters 64 and 65
IM neendb mam 20 a Oh
VUUINETD VO ali OF

It is possible to carry on computations covering 46 columns and the algebraic sign,

Special controls are available on the pairs of counters (65, 64) and (69, 68) which make possible
their use as two single adding counters. Counters 65 and 69 contain the high order columns
24-46; 64 and 68, the loworder columns 1-23, All additions and subtractions of 46 column num-
bers must be performed in one of these pair of "ganged" counters.

Such numbers are stored across two switches, for example A and B, The algebraic sign is
stored in the 24th column of both switches, Columns 1-23 of the number are stored in columns
1-23 of switch B and columns 24-46 of the number in columns 1-23 of switch A.

If such numbers are to be fed to the machine from cards or a value tape, two entries are re-
quired similar to those used in storing in switches,

46 column numbers are stored across two storage counters A and B with the algebraic sign in
the 24th column of both counters, columns 1-23 of the number in columns 1-23 of counter B,
and columns 24-46 of the number in columns 1-23 of counter A.

The numbers are stored across any pair of storage counters by reading in each half separately
to the two counters, These read-ins are subject to any of the usual operational codes.

ouT IN MISC.

1. A quantity lies across sws. or ctrs. (A,B); read it across A Cc 7
ctrs. (C,D).
q
2. Invert the read-out of the quantity across sws. or ctrs. A c 732
(A,B) into ctrs. (C,D).
732
3. Invert the read-out of the quantity across sws. or ctrs. A Cc 7432
(A,B) into ctrs. (C,D) under control of ctr. 70.
B D 7432
4. Read the absolute value of the quantity across cirs. A Cc 72
(A,B) into ctrs. (C,DB).
D 72
5. Read minus the absolute value of the quantity across A c 71

ctrs. (A,B) into ctrs. (C,D).

\
o
3

(7)

(8)

143

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

OuT IN MISC.
6. A quantity lies across ctrs, (A,B); reset the ctrs. A A vi
. B 7
7. <A quantity is stored across two cards, high order columns Cc 7632
in feed I and low order columns in feed II; read the quantity
into ctrs. (C,D), . D 76321
8. A quantity is stored across two cards in feed I, high order Cc 7632
column card preceding low order column card; read the
quantity into ctrs. (C,D). D 7632
9. A quantity is stored in two entries ina value tape on in- 85 7
terpolator I, high order columns preceding low order
columns; read the quantity into ctrs. (C,D). 85 Cc 753
D 753

The special carry controls of the "ganged" counters are such that column 23 of the low order
counter will carry to column 1 of the high order counter. Column 23 of the high order counter
will carry to column 24 of both of the counters, Column 24 of the high order counter has an
end around carry to column 1 of the lower order counter, The special codes operating these
carry controls are an 8 combined with the normal read-in codes of the counters in the In
columns,

The special controls on counters 64, 65, 68 and 69 do not invalidate their use as normal storage
counters, For usual operations, read-ins, read-outs and resets, the codes 7, 71, 73 and 731 of
the respective counters apply,

OUT IN MISC,

10, Add the quantities stored across sws, or ctrs. (A,B), A 731 7
{C,D) and (E,F), deliver the sum to ctrs. (G,H). Use

"ganged" ctrs. (69,68) for addition. B 73 vi

Cc 8731 7

D 873 7

E 8731 7

F 873 7

731 G 7

73 H 7

144

(9)

(10)

(11)

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
11. . Subtract the quantity across sws. or ctrs. (C,D) from the A 71 v1

quantity across sws. or ctrs, (A,B) and deliver the dif-
ference to ctrs. (E,F). Use "ganged" ctrs. (65,64) for B 7 7
subtraction.

Cc 871 732

D 87 732

71 E q

7 F vi

In order to use counter 70 as a sign control counter either the high order columns or the low
order columns of the 46 column number may be read into counter 70, since both are prefixed
by the algebraic sign.

out IN MISC.

12. Read the quantity stored across sws. or ctrs. (C,D) to A 732 7
ctrs. (E,F) under control of the algebraic sign of the
number stored across ctrs. (A,B). Cc E 7432
D F 7432

In using the "ganged" counters in multiplication, the operating decimal point of the machine
must lie between columns 46 and 47; i,e,, between columns 23 and 24 of the high order counter,
Therefore, computations in most cases must be normalized,

The automatic check counter may be used in high accuracy computation if comparisons are
made with known tolerances,

(a) If the tolerance is greater than or equal to 10723 it is necessary to check the high order
columns only.

OUT IN MISC.

13. Check the quantity across ctrs. (A,B) against a tolerance Pp 74 7
= 10-23 in sw. P.
A 14 71
74 74 64

(b) If the tolerance is less than 10725 it is necessary to check that the high order columns are
all zero and that the low order columns are less than the tolerance,
(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

145

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

OUT IN MISC.
14. Check the quantity stored across ctrs. (A,B) against a P 74 q
tolerance <10-23 in sw. Q. Sw. P =10-23,
74 71
14 4 64
Q 74 q
B 74 71
74 74 64

To read a 46 column product out of the PQ counter special plugging is required. See Plugging
Instructions.

In general, all products involving 46 column numbers must be accumulated in one of the pairs
of "ganged" counters using the special carry controls and the special product read-out, The
error of this product is not more than 3 in the lowest order column,

The code 873 or 87 in the In column of the line of coding reading out the product reads columns
24-46 of PQ to columns 1-23 of counter 68 or 64, and the sign column of PQ to column 24 of

counter 68 or 64 respectively,

The code 8731 or 871 in the In column of the line of coding reading out the product, followed
immediately by the line (86, 873, 7) or (86, 87, 7), reads the sign column of PQ to column 24 of
both counters 68 and 69 or 64 and 65, columns 24-46 of PQ to columns 1-23 of counter 69 or 65
and columns 1-23 of PQ to columns 1-23 of counter 68 or 64 respectively.

The special carry controls operate throughout these processes, permitting the accumulation of
the product.

Let (A, B) and (C, D) indicate two 46 column numbers stored across these pairs of counters
(high order columns in A and C),

(a) If all the numbers in a computation are known to be positive, the product (A, B) x (C, D) is
built up as follows:

Columns 1-46 of A x C to columns 1-23 of the high order and 1-23 of the loworder "ganged"
counters under the special product read-out,

Columns 24-46 of A x D to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter under the spe-
cial carry controls,

Columns 24-46 of B x C to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter under the spe-
cial carry controls.
146

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
15. Multiply (A,B) by (C,D) and deliver the product to ctrs. A 761 (7)
(69,68). All values positive. Lines where operations may
be interposed are left clear. 7's required if operations
are interposed are given as (7).
Cc (7)
8731 7
86 873 7
A 761 (7)
D (7)
873 7
B 761 (7)
ic (7)
873 7

(b) If some of the numbers in a computation may be negative, the product (A,B) x (C,D) is built
up as follows:
16,

147

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

Columns 1-46 of A x C to columns 1-23 of the high order and 1-23 of the low order "ganged"
counters under the special product read-out,

Columns 24-46 of A x D to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter under the special
carry controls, according as AxC is positive or negative and plus or minus zero to columns
1-23 of the high order "ganged" counter under the special carry controls and under control
of counter 70,

Columns 24-46 of B x C to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter under the special
carry controls, according as AxC is positive or negative and plus or minus zero to columns
1-23 of the high order "ganged" counter under the special carry controls and under control
of counter 70. : ;

OUT IN MISC,

Multiply (A,B) by (C,D) and deliver the product to ctrs. A 761 (7)
(65,64). Sw. P contains plus zero. Factors may be positive
or negative. Lines where operations may be interposed are
left clear, 7's required if operations are interposed are
given as (7). In general, no quantities should be read into
ctr. 65 before storing the algebraic sign in the choice

counter. c (7)
871 7
86 87 7
A 761 7

732 732 7

71 732

D ”

P 871 7432

P 871 (7)432
87 7

B 761 (7)

Continued on next page
148

CODING

OUT IN MISC.

16. (continued) Cc

ony
oe

87 7

(18) When one of the two factors of a product is known to be less than 10723, it is of the form (0,D).
Only one multiplication need be performed and the product maybe stored in any pair of counters

E and F.
{a) Tf all numbers are known to be positive, columns 24-46 of Ax D are read to eolumns 1-23
of counter F and counter E remains reset to zero.

(b} If some numbers may be negative, columns 24-46 of Ax D are read to columns 1-23 of
counter F and plus or minus zero to counter E under control of counter 70, according as
Ax D is positive or negative.

OUT IN MISC.
17, Multiply (A,B) by (0,D) and deliver the product to (E, F). A 761 (7)
Factors are positive. Spaces where operations may be
interposed are left clear. 7's required if operations are
interposed are given as (7).
iD (7)
F 7
18. Multiply (A,B) by (0,D) and deliver the product to (E,F). A 761 1
Sw. P contains plus zero. Factors may be positive or
negative. Spaces where operations may be interposed 732 732 (7)
are left clear. 7's required if operations are inter-
posed are given as (7). In general, no quantities should
be read into ctr. F before storing the algebraic sign in
the choice counter. D (7)

Continued on next page
HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

18, (continued)

149

OUT IN MISC,
F 7
F 732 7
P E 7432

(19) When one of the two factors of a product has only 23 decimal places, only two multiplications
need be performed and the factors are of the form (A,B) and (C,0).

(a) If all the numbers are known to be positive:

Columns 1-46 of Ax C are read to columns 1-23 of the high order and 1-23 of the low

order "ganged" counters.

Columns 24-46 of B x C are read to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter.

19. Multiply (A,B) by (C,0) and deliver the product to (69,68).
All values are positive. Lines where operations may be
interposed are left clear. ‘7's required if operations are
interposed are given as (7).

OUT | IN. | MISC.

A 761 (7)

Cc (7)
8731 |

86 873 7

B 761 (7)

Continued on next page
150

19. (continued) [e (7)

20. Multiply (A,B) by (C,0) and deliver the product to (69,68). A 761 7

CODING

OUT IN MiSC.

873 7

(b) If some numbers may be negative:

Columns 24-46 of Bx C are read to columns 1-23 of the low order "ganged" counter and
plus or minus zero to the high order "ganged" counter under control of counter 70 ac-
cording as Ax C is positive or negative.

OUT IN MISC.

Sw, P contains plus zero, Factors may he positive or
negative. Lines where operations may be interposed are 732 132 (7)
left clear, 7's required if operations are interposed are

given as (7). In general, no quantities should be read into

ctr. 69 before storing the algebraic sign in the choice

counter. c (7)
8731 q
86 873 q
B 761 q

731 732 7

Pp 8731 432

Cc (7)

Continued on next page
151

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

OUT IN MISC.

20. (continued)

873 7

(20) Division in high accuracy computation may be performed by dividing by the high order columns
of the divisor to obtain a first approximation to the reciprocal, iterating once for the reciprocal
and multiplying. Since the operating decimal point lies between columns 23 and 24, division
should be plugged for 24 comparisons and the "Divide N minus Decimal" switch must be set at
zero, If the absolute value of the divisor is such that 1>|DR|>107", in place of 1, 10-7 must
be used as the dividend in obtaining the reciprocal, Thus after division the Q-shift counter
stands at zero and the first approximation to the reciprocal is delivered as Qx 10""*, This
quotient is then routed through either the LIO or the SIO counter and shifted to the left.

21. Divide (A,B) by (C,D), where either or both of the quantities may be negative, 1>|c|>0.1,
and deliver the quotient to (65,64). The LIO-OUT is plugged to shift one column to the left.
The SIO-OUT II is plugged to shift positive quantities one column to the left, The SIO-OUTI
is plugged to read the 23rd column of SIO to the first column of the buss.

Sw. P = 1 in the 23rd column.
Sw. Q = 5 in the 2nd column.
Sw. R = minus zero.

Sw.S = 2 in the 23rd column.
Sw. T = 1 in the lst column.

Counters G, H, 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, LIO and SIO are available for computation but are not
reset,

The equations used in the computation are

X= 1/|c|
N = |(c,D)|
X= Xp (2 - Nx,) .

After the iteration, five is added in column 3 to obtain the best result, Errors at various
stages are as follows:
x,/10 = 1/ton + 10°22

X,/10 = 1/10N + 51 x 1077

Final result = (A,B)/10(C,D) t 512 x 10748

An additional iteration will gain very little accuracy, the errors then being as follows:
152

CODING
x,/10 = 1/10N 2 3x 19745

Final result = (A,B)/10(C,D) + 32 x 107°

The quotient as delivered to (65,64)is (A,B)/10(C,D). (7)'s must be omitted if nooperations
are interposed,

OUT IN MISC,

|C| to DR c 76 72
reset ctr. G, reset SIO G G 7321
reset ctr. H, reset LIO H 63
i in 23rd col. to DD Pp 7
reset ctr. 64 7 7 7
reset ctr. 65 71 71 7
reset ctr. 68 73 73 7
reset ctr. 69 731 731 7
reset ctr. 70 732 732 (7)
18 cycles free for interposed operations
1/(100|C|) to ctr. H H 7
i/(i6G|C]) to SIO H 874 v
1/(10 Ic]} to ctr. G = x,/10 84 G 7
-|c| to Mc c 761 71
reset ctr. H H H (7)
X/ 10 to MP G (3)
-|c]x,/10 to (69,68) 8731 «(17

86 873 7

Varese aR 2s
HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

21, (continued)
-|D| to MC
-0 to (69,68)

Xq/ 10 to MP
2 in 23rd col. to (69,68)

-|D|x_/10 to (69,68); (69,68) = (2 - Nx))/10

HO (2 - Nx,)/10 to MC

X,/10 to MP

X,(2 - Nx,)/ 100 to (65,64)

LO (2 - Nx )/10 to MC
C to ctr. 70

5 in 2nd col. to ctr. 64
X,/10 to MP

reset ctr. 68

reset ctr. 69

reset ctr. G

153

ouT | IN | MISC.
761 71
8731 ‘| (7)
G 7
8731 | (7)
873 7
731 761 (7)
G (7)
871 7
86 87 7
73 761 7
732 1
Q 87
G 1
73 13 7
731 731 7
G G \7

Continued on next page
154

Zi. (continued)

reset SIO

X (2 - Nx,)/100 to (65,64)
HO X9(2 - Nx,)/100 to LIO
HO x(2 - Nxp)/10 to ctr. G
LO xp(2 - Nxp)/100 to SIO

CODING

1st col. SIO to ctr. G; reset LIO; G = HO x,/10

LO x (2 - Nx,)/10 to ctr. H; H = LO x, /10

Ato MC under control of ctr. 70
reset ctr. 64
reset ctr. 65

HO x,/10 to MP

(A,B)x,/10 to (65,64)

Ato MC under control of ctr. 70

LO x,/10 to MP

(A,B)x,/10 to (65,64)
B to MC under control of ctr. 70

reset ctr. 70

MISC.

OUT | IN
321

87 1

71 765421 |7

831 G 7

7 874 7

874 G 763

84 H 7

A 761 7432

7 7 7

71 71

G (7)
871 7

86 87 1

A 761 (7)432

H (7)
87 7

B 761 7432

732 732 7

Continued on next page

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

155

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

21, (continued) ; OUT IN MISC.
-HO (A,B)x, /10 to ctr. 70 71 732 32
HO x,/ 10 to MP G 7
+0 to (65,64) under control of ctr. 70 R 871 7432
+0 to (65,64) under control of ctr. 70 R 871 7432
1 in Ist col. to ctr. 64 T 87
(A,B)x,/ 10 to (65,64) 87 7

If 46 column numbers are to be punched in cards, they must be punched in two cards, one con-
taining the high order columns and the algebraic sign, and the second, the low order columns

and the algebraic sign,
OUT IN MISC.
22. Punch out the number (A,B). A 753
51
“1B 753
75

To print 46 column numbers, the high order columns may be printed on one typewriter and the
low order columns on the other, If the low order columns are printed with several spaces after
the decimal point, the algebraic sign and the decimal point may be cut off and the strips joined
side by side. ;

OUT IN MISC.
23. Print the number (A,B). A 7432
752 6
B 74321
7521 7

If numbers have been normalized for high accuracy computation, they may usually be printed
with their decimal points in true position by suitable typewriter plugging. See Plugging In-
structions.

The following is an example of the building up of a series in high accuracy computation,

24, Determine Ax2 + Bx + C, where no information is given of any algebraic sign, store the
result in (E, F), and print it on typewriter I. A, B and C are 46 column numbers stored in
switches (Ay> Ao), (By, Bo) and (Cy, Co). Sw. P = plus zero, x is stored in ctrs, (x,, Xq).

Counters E, F, 64, 65, 68, 69 and 70 are available for computation, (7)'s must be omitted
if no operations are interposed,
156

CODING
24, (continued) OUT IN MISC.
Ay to MC Ay 761 7
reset ctr. 69 731 731 1
reset ctr. 68 13 93
x to MP Xy q
reset ctr. 70 732 732 7
reset ctr. 65 71 71 7
reset ctr. 64 q q
HO A, to ctr. 69 8731 q
LO Ax. to ctr. 68 86 873 7
11
Ay to MC Ay 761 q
A,X, to ctr. 70 731 732 vi
+0 to (69,68) under control of ctr. 70 Pp 8731 432
Xp to MP Xo . q
+0 to (69,68) under control of ctr. 70 Pp 8731 7432
B; to ctr. 69 B. 8731 vi
By to ctr. 68 By 873
Ay, Xq to (69,68) 873 qT
Ay to MC Ao 761 (7)
x. to MP X. (7)
i i f)
AgX to (69,68) | 873 7
Xj te MC xy 761 7

Continued on next page
157

HIGH ACCURACY COMPUTATION

24, (continued) OUT IN MISC,
reset ctr. 70 732 732 (7)
HO (Ax + B) to MP 731 (7)
HO (Ax + B)x, to ctr. 65 871 7
LO (Ax + B)x,; to ctr. 64 86 87 7
x to MC xy 761 vi
HO (Ax + B)x, to ctr. 70 71 732 (7)
LO (Ax + B) to MP . 73 7
+0 to (65,64) under control of ctr. 70 Pp 871 7432
+0 to (65,64) under control of ctr. 70 Pp 871 (7)432
(Ax + B)x, to (65,64); turn on typewriter I 872 87 7
Xo to MC X9 761 7
reset ctr. E E E 7
reset ctr. F F F
HO (Ax + B) to MP 731 7
C, to ctr. 65 Cy 871 7
Cy to ctr. 64 Cy 87 (7)
(Ax + B)xy to (65,64) 87 7
ctr, 65 to ctr. E 71 E 7
ctr. 64 to ctr. F vi F 7

Continued on next page
158

CODING

24, (continued)

print value in ctr. 65 on typewriter I

print value in ctr. 64 on typewriter I

OUT IN MISC.
ces 7432
752 6
7 7432
752 6

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

159

NORMALIZING REGISTER

Any positive quantity may be shifted so that its first significant digit stands in the 23rd machine
column, This is done within the machine by multiplying the given quantity by a one in sucha
position that the first significant digit will fall in the 23rd column of the PQ counter, The prod-
uct is then read out of the first 23 columns of the PQcounter by means of the loworder product
read-out (86 in the Out column), The number of columns shifted is recorded in a counter and a
predetermined number of significant digits and a power of ten are read out, For example, if

0000 35296 73145 89740 28715
0000 00000 00000 27557 68214

stand in the machine, operating with decimal point between columns 15 and 16, they may be read
out as . ;

3529 1; i., 3529 x 10
2755 -9; i.e., 2755 x 10-9,

Thus the second quantity printed indicates the power of ten by which the first quantity is to be
multiplied. .

The number of significant digits printed and the position of the decimal point, if printed, are
determined by the typewriter plugging.

The power of ten recorded is determined by the position of the final decimal point and the oper-
ating decimal point of the machine,

A constant K is placed in a switch in columns 20 and 21, Here K = 23 -n-d, where d is
equal to the number of digits to the left of the final decimal point and the operating decimal
point of the machine lies between columns n and n+ 1, ;

The power of ten recorded lies in columns 20 and 21 and must be read out or printed out of
those columns,

Negative quantities must be routed through this procedure as positive absolute values, The al-
gebraic sign is stored in counter 70 and the final read-out of the quantity must be under control
of counter 70.

The code 8321 in the In column shifts the quantity under consideration into the first 23 columns
of PQ. The code 8321 in the Out column reads the amount of the shift to the counter indicated,
These codes are not independent and must be used in conjunction with the multiplication coding
as shown below,

The special coding requires nine cycles of computation time, Counter A contains the quantity
to be treated. Counters B, C, D and E are reset and available for computation, Switch SC con-
tains the constant K, At the end of the process, counter B contains the power of ten, counter D
contains the quantity under consideration with its first significant digit in the 23rd column and
counter E contains the "one" multiplier selected by the shift circuit, Note that the line of coding
reading the normal product-out may not be used for any other operation.

OUT IN MISC.

1, The operating decimal point lies between cols, 15 and 16, A 761 qT
The final decimal point is to lie between cols, 19 and 20,
Thus K = 4 is placed in col, 20 of sw.SC, The quantity in sc B 7

ctr.A is shifted and printed together with its power of ten,
Continued on next page
160

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
1. (continued) A 8321
E 7
8321 c 7
This line of coding may contain any of the codes normally 1
interposed in multiplication. (A second such line may also
be interposed if it is known that the quantity to be shifted Cc B 32
does not equal zero.) 7
86 D 7
D 7432
752 é
B 7432
752 7

(7) It is advisable to check the multiplication involved in this process by interchanging multiplier
and multiplicand. Thus the "one" multiplier, read into storage counter E, is used as the multi-
plicand in the second multiplication, The product is again read out under the special low order

read-out.
OUT in MISC.
2. The operating decimal point lies between cols, 15 and A 761 7
16, The final decimai point is to lie between cols, 19
and 20, The tolerance of one in the first column lies sc B 7
in sw. SB.
A 8321
E 7
9321 c 7
7
Cc B 32
7
86 D 7
E 761 7
74 74 q
SB 74

Continued on next page
2.

(continued)

NORMALIZING REGISTER

161

OUT

IN

MISC.

(7)32

86

74

71

64

162

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

LOGARITHM UNIT

The logarithmic function delivered by the machine is log g - Logarithms to other bases may
be obtained by multiplying by a suitable constant.

logy
log,N = oN = 10g, oN . log, 10
logy ga
In particular
log .N = log, gN . log 10
where

log,10 = 2.302 585 092 994 045 684 017 991.

If the operating decimal point lies between columns 21 and 22, the error in this function is less
than 5x 10-21, If the decimal point lies between columns n and n+1, n< 21, the error is
less than 10-2 + 5 x 10-41, If desired, for log x > 0, a coded half pick-up may be added and the
error reduced to 1/2(10-" + 10-20) as shown in example 4 below.

The range of arguments covered is 10-22 to 1023 - 1,

Logarithms with negative characteristics may not be computed directly if there are ten or
fewer operating decimal piaces, For exception, see note (10).

The two dial switches labeled "Log N value" to the right of the sequence mechanism must be
sei at 2Z - n, where the operating decimai point is between columns n and n+i,

The logarithm unit requires plugging of the LIO counter to care for the decimal point. See

Dilirerineg Instructions
SeUB pin ssh ek Wr eA Ok @

The LIO counter may be used as a storage counter, for the addition of positive quantities, and
to shift numbers, since it has a pluggable read-out, See Logarithm In-Out Counter and Plug-
ging Instructions,

Before using the logarithm unit it should be tested on known values:
e = 2,718 281 828 459 045 235 360 287,
log. .¢ = 0,434 294 481 903 251 827 651 129.
Any operation not using the buss may be carried on during the logarithm computation time.
This requires a 7 in the Miscellaneous column of the first line of logarithm coding and no

automatic (no 7 in the Miscellaneous column) in the last line of interposed coding. This coding
is shown in example 5,

OUT IN - | MISC.

1. x lies in sw.or ctr. A. Determine log, o* and deliver it A 162
to ctr. B.

831 B

“J

763

LOGARITHM UNIT

x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Determine log, o/#! ‘and deliver
it to ctr. B.

x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Determine log ex and deliver it
to ctr. B. Log,10 lies in sw. P.

Logx>0. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Determine log ox and
deliver it to ctr. B. If the operating decimal point lies
between columns n and n + 1, sw. P must contain a 5 in
the (21 - n)th column.

Print the quantities in ctrs. C and D. Punch the quantity
in ctr. E. Step the value tape on interpolator I ahead
twice. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Determine log, ox and
deliver it to ctr. B.

(repeat this line 23 times)

163

out | In | isc.
A nn oe
831 {|B 7
763
A 762
831 |B 7
763
761
7
B B
B 7
lA 762
P 765421 |7
831 |B 7
763
c 7432
D 74321
E 753
A 762 «(175
752 = |753
7153
7
7521
831 «|B 7
763

164

CODING

(10) If negative logarithms are computed when there are ten or fewer operating decimal places,
more nines will be required for the read-out of the complementary figure than the ten that
are available by plugging. The additional nines required may be supplied from a switch under
control of the choice counter. If the operating decimal point is between columns 8 and 9, 13
nines are needed in columns 11-23, Ten of them are supplied by plugging to ten columns, say
14-23, and three are supplied from a switch to columns 11-13,

leita IN MISC.

6. The operating decimal point lies between cols, 8 and 9. A 762
x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Sw. P has 000 in cols, 11-13.
‘The other columns of sw. P (cols. 1-10 and 14-24) are 831 B 7
set on the blank position (not zero). Nines are plugged
to cols, 14-23. The algebriac sign, col, 24, is bottle- B 732 763

plugged as usual, Determine log. _x and deliver it to
ctr. B. 10 P B 7432

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

(8)

(9)

165
EXPONENTIAL UNIT

The exponential function delivered by the machine is 10*. Exponential functions of other bases
may be obtained by multiplication, .

a o 10* logy 92

In particular
ex -1 o* logy 9@
where

log, o¢ = 0.434 294 481 903 251 827 651 129.

If the operating decimal point lies between columns 21 and 22, the error in this function is less
than 5x 10721, If the decimal point lies between columns n and n+1,n< 21, the error is
less than 10-0 + 5 x 10-21, A half pick-up may be added and the error reduced, as shown in ex-
ample 5 below, to 1/2(10-" + 10-20),

The range of argumerits covered is - 20 to 23 - 10-2 where the operating decimal point lies
between columns n and n+ 1.

Any operation not using the buss may be carried on during the exponential computation time,
This requires a 7 in the Miscellaneous column of the first line of exponential coding and no
automatic (no 7in the Miscellaneous column) in the last line of interposed coding. This is shown
in example 6,

The exponential unit requires plugging of the EIO counter to care for the decimal point, See
Plugging Instructions.

if an exponential is preceded by a multiplication or a division, at least one line of coding (blank,
blank, 7) or some other operation not involving a functional unit must be inserted between the

Operations,

If an exponential is preceded by an interpolation, at least one line of coding (blank, blank, 7) or
some other operation not involving a functional unit must be inserted between the operations,
This with the last line of interpolation coding makes two such lines intervening,

The hyperbolic functions may be obtained from the exponential functions by algebraic oper-
ations,

Before using the exponential unit in a computation, it should be tested on known values.
10'°F10° . ¢

10g, 9@ = 0.434 294 481 903 251 827 651 129

e = 2.718 281 828 459 045 235 360 287

OUT IN MISC.

1, x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Compute 10* and deliver A 7621
it to ctr. B.
741
832 B

131

166

CODING

2, x lies in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A. Compute 10-*
and deliver it to ctr. B.

3, x lies in IVS. Compute 10™ and deliver it to ctr. B.

4, x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Ctr. C is available for compu-
tation. Log, @ lies in sw. P. Compute e* and deliver
it to ctr. B.

5. x lies in sw. or ctr, A. Sw. P contains a 5 in the
(21 - n)th column, where the operating decimal point
lies between columns n and n+ 1. Compute 1
and deliver ii io cir. B.

6. Print the quantities in ctrs. C and D. Punch the quantity
in ctr. E. Step the tape on interpolator ii back three
times. x lies in ctr, A. Compute 10* and deliver it to
ctr. B.

OUT IN MISC.
A 7621 32
741
832 B
731
8431 7621 21
741
832 B
731
A 761
P
Cc 7
7
c 7621
741
832 B
731
A 7621
741
P 741
832 B
731
c 7432
Continued on next page

6.

7.

EXPONENTIAL UNIT

(continued)

(repeat this line 22 times)

x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Ctr.C is available for compu-
tation. Sw. P=1. Sw.Q=1/2. Sw. R = log,_e.
Compute sinh x and deliver it to ctr. B. If x 1Q known
to be positive, bracketed codes and lines may be omitted.

167

OUT | IN | MISC.
D 74321
E 153
A 7621 | 75
152 7541
7541
7
7521 | 541
741
832 B
731
A 761 (2)
R
Cc 7
1
Cc 7621
741
832 B
731
76 32
P
B 7
B 761 (7)
(732) |(732) «| (7)
(A) (732) | (7)
Q 7(432)
B B
7

168

8.

CODING

x lies in sw. or ctr, A. Cir, C is available for compu-
tation. Sw. P=1. Sw.Q=1/2. Sw.R = log, 9@- Com-
pute cosh x and deliver it to ctr. B.

x lies insw.orctr.A. Sw. P=1. Sw. Q = log,,e.
Ctrs. C and D are available for computation. Compute
tanh x and deliver it to ctr. B. If x is known to be posi-
tive, bracketed codes and lines may be omitted,

ouT | IN | MISC.
761
Cc 7
7
c 7621 |2
741
832 B
731
B 76
P
B 7
761
7
B B
7
A Cc 7(2)
A Cc 7(2)
c 761 (7)
(732) | (732) «| (7)
(A) (732) | (7)
Q
D 7
7
D 1621
741
832 B

Continued on next page

9.

(continued)

-EXPONENTIAL UNIT

169

ouT

IN

MISC,

731

7

76

7(432)

732

32

7

Oi olululmins

170

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

Roots and reciprocals of roots may be found by using logarithms and exponentials. However,
if 2 good first approximation is available, the method of iteration is not only faster, but is also

& BCCE TIPS) apps Caiman s> aliAdDie, ie ie

self-corrective,

Square roots may be found using logarithms and exponentials by

wi _ i9(loe10N) 2

OUT IN MISC.
1, N lies in ctr. A. w!/2 is to be delivered to ctr. B. Ctrs. A 762
C and D are available for computation. Sw. P = 1/2,
831 Cc 7
763
761
Pp
D 7
| 7
D 7621
741
832 B
731

The Newton-Raphson method of determining the roots of an equation f(x) = 0 requires that
f'(z) 4 0 and £"(x) # 0 between the first approximation, Xo to the root of f(x) and X, the root
sought, and that fp) . £"(x>) > 0, Then

i(x,)
i'(q) |

gives successive approximations to x, If successive iterations involving division are performed,

thea annnranad of divicinn ¢
the accuracy of division should be successively increased, This method may after further in-

vestigation be applied in some cases when the function does not satisfy all of the above con-
ditions,

(A) x 17% n= 0,1, 2,...

nil n

In some cases the computation may be simplified by using

B) £(Xq)
x =X -
n+l n f(x)

»>ne=06,i1,2,...

for the successive iterations, though this does not converge as rapidly as (A).

If the method of iteration is used.to obtain the positive square root of N, then

x t= Ga ,+ N/A,)/2
nm+i “ars = +
171
SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

In performing the successive iterations, the accuracy of division should be successively in-

creased. The error, Cena LD of Xiad is given by:

. _wl/2
en+i**nel wl/

1/2

2
= ef /2(e,+N ) and

<2, 1/2
Cnet e. /2N >» n>d

(5) Since most machine computation is repeated for values of N which change by small amounts,
the root or reciprocal calculated for the preceding value of N will in general be available for
use as a first approximation when starting the next iterative process.

ouT | IN_ | Misc.

2. Nlies in ctr. A, The approximation to N'/@ liesinctr.B. |B 76
Read the next approximation to ctr. B. Sw. P =1/2.

B 7
761
. 7
B
7

(6) If two successive iterations are to be made in finding ni/ 2) machine time may be saved by
using the following coding which involves two divisions, one multiplication and four additions
instead. of two divisions and two multiplications, Usually it will be possible to interpose the
four adding cycles, thus reducing the time for two iterations to 81 cycles.

3. N lies inctr. A. The approximation x, to ni/2 lies in ctr, B, Read the approximation
Xo to ctr, B, Sw. P = 1/4, (7)'s are tobe omitted if no operations are interposed, Ctr.C
is available for computation,

OUT IN MISC.
Xq to MC B 761 7
reset ctr. C Cc Cc 7
Xp to ctr. C B Cc
1/4 to MP P 7
Xy to ctr. C B Cc vi
Xo to ctr. C B Cc 7

Continued on next page
172

CODING

3. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
Xp to ctr. C; C = 4x, B c 7
reset ctr. B B B
X,/4 to ctr. B B 7
4x 0 to DR; place limitation Cc 76 76432
reset ctr. C Cc Cc (7)
N to DD A (7)

n+ 1 cycles free for interposed operations where n is
the number of significant digits (including the first "no
go") for which the Misc. 6432 code is plugged.

N/4x) to ctr. B; B= x,/4 + N/4x, = x/2 B 7
x,/2 to ctr. C B Cc 7
x,/2 to ctr. C B Cc 7
x,/2 to ctr. C B Cc 1
x,/2 to ctr. C; C= 2x, B c 7
2x, to DR Cc 76 (7)
N to DD A (7)
n+ i cycles free for interposed operations where n is

the number of significant digits (including the first "no

go") in the quotient.

N/2x, to ctr. B; B= x, /2 + N/2x, = Xp B q

(7) If other computations are being carried on in which operations may be interposed, the time
for three successive iterations may be reduced from three divisions and three multiplications
to three divisions, one multiplication and 13 adding cycles, which may be interposed.

(8) To find the cube root of N by iteration

2
Xie1? ax_/3 + N/3x7 and

2 1/3
ee 1<°n/@, +N‘°).
SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

4, N lies inctr, A, The approximation to nif lies in
ctr. B. Read the next approximation to ctr. B. Ctr.C
is available for computation and sw, P = 1/3. (7)'s
must be omitted if no operations are interposed.

n cycles free for interposed operations where n is the
number of significant digits (including the first "no go")
in the quotient.

(9) The cube root of N may also be found by iteration by

3
xX, +2N

173

OUT IN MISC.
B 761 7
Cc c (7)
B (7)
c 7
c 76 7
c Cc 1
Bo c
A 7
B c (7)
c 7
c 761 7
Cc c q
B B
P (7)
B 7

174

CODING

This involves three muitiplications and a division but in most cases converges much more
rapidly than the method given in note (8), so that fewer iterations need be used for the desired
accuracy, If two successive approximations x, and xy , 1 agree inthe first i significant digits,

then x, , 1 will be correct to 3i - 2 digits, The error eal is given by:

o° (e, + aN!)
“n+1 7 1/33 OUT ; IN | MISC.
2(e,+N'/") + N
1 B 761 7
5. N liesin ctr. A. The approximation to N /3 lies in
ctr. B. Read the next approximation to ctr. B. Ctrs. Cc Cc vi
C and D are available for computation. (7)'s must be
omitted if no operations are interposed. D D
B (7)
Cc 7
Cc 761 7
Cc Cc 7
A B
B (7)
. 3
Cir.C =x c 7
0
Cc 7
Ctr, D =2x,94+N c 7
D 76 q
A c 7
cir. c =x, +2N A
jc 7
Cc Cc 7

Continued on next page
(10)

SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

175

5. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
D D (7)
n- 1 cycles free for interposed operations where n is the num-
ber of significant digits (including the first "no go") in the
quotient.
Cc 7
3 3
Ctr.C = (Xp +2N) / (2x) +N) Cc 761 (7)
B 7
B B 7
Cc (7)
Ctr.B =x (x? 4 2N) /(2x°4N) =x B 7
0" 0 0 1
The reciprocal of N may be found by iteration using
* +17 x,@ 7 Nx) ,
= -Ne2
“+17 Ne, .
In high accuracy computation, it is necessary to use this process for division,
OUT IN MISC.
6. N lies in ctr..A. The approximation to 1/N lies in ctr. B. A 761 132
Ctr. C is available for computation. Sw. P =2. (7)'s
must be omitted if no operations are interposed. The new Cc Cc 7
approximation to the reciprocal of N is to be delivered _
to ctr, B. ; Pp Cc
B (7)

Continued on next page
176

CODING
6. (continued) OUT IN MISC.

Cc 7

B 761 (7)

Cc 7

c c 7

B B
B 7

(11) In many applications of the process of iteration the choice of the function f(x) can be so made

as to conserve much machine time, This is evident in iterating for 1/N!/P, f(x) maybe written
either as ;

(1) f(x) <1? -N
or (2) f(x) =1-NxP .
(1) leads to

(la) =x fo n

ae | n

|

res ft

which requires p +2 multiplications, unless N/p is available, in which case only p + 1 multi-
plications are required,

{2) leads to n

1+ (p - 1)Nx?

(2a) x = ——
nel pNx, 1)

which requires p +1 multiplications and a division, Obviously, the former requires less ma-
chine time than the latter and should be used for all roots of reciprocals, If (1a) is used to
obtain 1/N*/*, the error after each iteration is

2,1/2
3e" N
e, 1 =o a .
mei 2
OUT IN MISC.
%. N lies in ctr, A. The approximation to nlf? lies in ctr, B 761 7

B. Read the next approximation to ctr, B. Ctr. C is avail-

able for computation. Sw, P =1/2. Sw. Q =3. (7)'s must Cc Cc (7)

be omitted if no operations are interposed.
Continued on next page
7.

(continued)

SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

177

oUT | IN. | MISC,
B (7)
Cc ”
Cc 761 732
iC Cc 7
Q Cc
A (7)
le 7
Cc 761 7
Cc Cc (77)
B (77)
Cc "
Cc 761 "7
Cc Cc (7)
P 7

Continued on next page
178

>

(

CODING

(continued)

N/2 lies in ctr. A. The approximation to nls 2 lies
in ctr. B. Read the next approximation to ctr. B. Ctr.
C is available for computation. Sw. P =3/2. (7)'s
must be omitted if no operations are interposed. The
computation of example 7 may be modified so that the
method of example 8 may be used for each successive
iteration after the first, thereby requiring four mul-
tiplications for the first iteration and three for each
thereafter. In this case, Sw. Q =3/2, and N/2 is com-
puted directly and retained, rather than computing each
iteration in the form

2
xa4+ i = x, 8/2 - an N/2).

our | IN | MISC,

B B
B 7

B 761 7

Cc Cc (7)

B (7)
Cc 7

c 761 7

Cc Cc 7

P c

A ('1)32
Cc 7

c 761 (7)

B 1
Cc 7

Continued on next page

(12)

179

SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

8. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
B B (7)
B 7

The Rule of False Position

If f(x) is continuous in the interval as x<b and f(a) and f(b) are of opposite sign, then
at =a - b=) fla)
f(b) - f(a)

is a first approximation to the root of f(x) lying between a and b. Since f(a') and either f(a)
or f(b) are of opposite sign, either

at a - @73)f@) 0 on pp >») ft)
f(a') - f(a) f(a') - £(b)

is a second approximation.

9. If counter A =a
counter B =b
counter C = f(a)
counter D = f(b)
switch P =1/2

and counters E through L and counter 70 are available for computation, the following coding will
deliver:

a or b depending on the sign of f(a') to counter A,

a' to counter B, ;

f(a) or f(b) depending on the sign of f(a') to counter Cc,
f(a') to counter D.

The coding may be repeated to obtain the desired accuracy and the accuracy of division should
be increased with the repetitions,

OUT IN MISC,
reset ctr. F. F F 7
a toctr. F A F 7
-btoctr. F; F=a-b B 732
f(a) to MC Cc 761 vi
reset cir.I I I 7

Continued on next page
180

CODING

9. (continued) OUT | IN MISC.
f(a) to ctr. I Cc I
- (b- a) toMP F 7
- f(b) to ctr.I; I = f(a) - f(b) ~ D I 132
reset ctr. 70 732 132 7
reset ctr. K K K
~ (b - a) f(a) to ctr. K K 7
f(b) - f(a) to DR I 76 732
reset ctr. E E E 7
atoctr.E AD E
- (b - a) f(2} to DD K 7
reset ctr. K K K 7
a to ctr. K A K 7
b toctr. EB; E=a+b B E q
reset ctr. H H H 7
f(a) to ctr. H Cc H 7
f(b) to ctr. H; H = f(a) + f(b) D H q
reset ctr. G G G 7
f(a) to ctr. 70 Cc 732 q
(a - b) or - (a - b) toctr.G F G 7432
reset ctr. J J J 7
[t(a) - £(b)] or - [t(a) - f(b] to ctr. J I J 432
a' inetr. K K 7
f(a'} is computed and stored in ctr. L; during the compu- 732 732 7
tation, ctr. 70 is reset
~ f(a') to ctr. 70 L 732 732
2a or 2b to ctr. E under control of ctr, 70 G E 7432

Continued on next page
SQUARE ROOTS AND OTHER ITERATIVE PROCESSES

(continued)

2f(a) or 2f(b) to ctr. H under control of ctr. 70
2a or 2b to MC

reset ctr, B

a' toctr,B

1/2 to MP

reset cir. D

f(a') to ctr. D

reset ctr. A

aor b tocir.A

2f(a) or 2f(b) to MC

1/2 to MP

reset ctr.C

f(a) or f(b) toctr.c

181

OUT IN MISC.
J H 7432
E 761 7
B B 7
K B 7
Pp 7
D D 7
L |D 7
A A
A 7
H 761 (7)
P. 7
Cc c
Cc 7

182

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(9)

SINE UNIT

If the operating decimal point lies between columns 22 and 23, the error in this function is less
than 5x 10-22, If the decimal point lies between columns n and n+i,n< 22, the error is
less than 6,5 x 10-2 +5 x 10-22, A half pick-up may be added and the error reduced to less
than 6x 10-2 + 5x 10-22 as shown in example 5 below.

Any positive or negative argument in radians may be used, except that sines of third and fourth
quadrant angles cannot be computed directly if there are eleven or fewer operating decimal
places. For exception, see note (10).

The sine unit requires plugging of the SIO counter and the read-out of 1/2 7 to care for the
decimal point. See Plugging Instructions.

The SIO counter may be used as a storage counter, for the addition of positive quantities and to
shift or split numbers, since it has pluggable read-in and read-outs, See Sine In-Out Counter
and Plugging Instructions,

Before using the sine unit in a computation it should be tested on known values.

a
v

sin 0,584 073 464 102 067 615 3736 = 0.551 426 681 241 690 550 6611

sin 1.867 258 771 281 654 092 2989 = 0.956 375 928 404 503 013 4325

sin 7 =sin 3.141 592 653 589 793 238 4626 = - 0

sin 3.867 258 771 281 654 092 2989 =-0,663 633 884 212 967 502 1510

sin 4,867 258 771 281 654 092 2989 =-0,988 031 624 092 861 789 9878

The unit should also be tested for sines of negative arguments.

Any operation not using the buss may be carried on during the sine computation time, This
requires a 7 in the Miscellaneous column of the first line of sine coding and no automatic (no 7
Ne ie Miscellaneous column) in the last line of interposed coding. This is shown in example 6

Two sines may not be computed successively, At least one line of coding, (blank, blank, 7) or
some other operation not involving the functional units must be inserted.

The cosine may be computed by the sine unit by means of the relation

cos x = sin( 7/2 - x).

The remaining trigonometric functions may be computed by the usual algebraic operations,

OUT IN MISC.

1. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Compute sin x and deliver it A _ 17631
to ctr. B.

84 B 7

7321

SINE UNIT

X lies in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A. Compute sin (-x)
and deliver it to ctr. B.

x lies in IVS. Compute sin (-x) and deliver it to ctr. B.

x lies in sw. orctr, A. 7/2 lies in sw. P. Ctr.C
is available for computation. Compute cos x and
deliver it to ctr. B.

x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Compute sin x and deliver it
to ctr. B. Sw. P contains a 5 in the (22 - n)th column
when the operating decimal point lies between columns
nandn+1.

Print the quantities in ctrs. C and D. Punch the
quantity in ctr. E. Step the value tape on interpo-
lator III back twice. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Compute
sin x and deliver it to ctr. B.

(repeat this line 23 times)

183

ouT IN MISC.
A 7631 32
84 B 7
7321
8431 7631 =| 21
84 B 7
7321
P Cc 7
Cc 732
Cc 7631
84 B 7
7321
A 7631
P 874 7
84 B 7
7321
Cc 7432.
D 74321
E 753
A 7631 75
752 7542
7
7521 542

Continued on next page
184

(10)

(11)

CODING

6. (continued)

OUT IN MISC.
84 B 7
7321

If negative sines are computed when there are eleven or fewer operating decimal places, more
nines will be required for the read-out of the complementary figure than the ten that are avail-
able by plugging, The additional nines required may be supplied from a switch under control of
the choice counter, If the operating decimal point is between columns 9 and 10, 13 nines are
needed in columns 11-23, Ten of them are supplied by plugging to ten columns, say 14-23, and

three are supplied from a switch to columns 11-23,

4%. The operating decimal point lies between cols. 9 and 10.
x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Sw. P has 000 in cols, 11-13.
The other columns of sw. P (cols, 1-10 and 14-24) are
set on the blank position (not zero), Nines are plugged
to cols. 14-23, The algebraic sign, col. 24, is bottle-
plugged as usual. Compute sin x and deliver it to ctr. B.

OUT IN MISC.
A 7631
84 B 7
B 732 7321
Pp B 7432

Before using the sine unit, the "85-1 P.U."switch and "SIO-OUT-2 Invert Control" switch must

both lie in the on position.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

185

INTERPOLATORS

If an interpolator has not been in use for some time, it should be tested before being used ina
computation, Diagonal numbers should be read out. If interpolation is to be carried on, several
values should be computed.

A tape containing a set of numerical values, arbitrary constants or random values of a function
is called a value tape rather than a functional tape.

Before using a functional tape, two switch settings must be made, One half the number of argu-
ments is set up in the push button switches labeled "Value Tape set up 1/2 "A" values in tape"
above the interpolator, The number of interpolational coefficients (including C,,) is set in each
of the dial switches labeled "Set up number of "C" values on each switch" above the interpo-
lator, See note (28) for special use of the dial switches,

The tape decimal point, the "highest order 'h'" and the interval of the argument must be speci-
fied for proper plugging of the interpolators. If the tape contains negative C values, the decimal
point may not be shifted to the right. See Plugging Instructions.

It is desirable that functional tapes be designed with the tape decimal point between columns 15
and 16 unless more decimal places are needed for the desired accuracy,

A functional tape positions to the closest value of the argument if the Miscellaneous column of
the first line of interpolation coding is blank or 61, It positions to the closest lower value of
the argument if the Miscellaneous column of the first line of coding contains 641 or if the first
column of the interpolation counter is not plugged.

If an argument which is not in the range of the tape is sent to the interpolator, a red light is
switched on above interpolator I and the machine is stopped.

Interpolators I, If and III are distinguished by the operational codes 7654, 76541 and 76542 re-
spectively in the In column,

OUT IN MISC.
1, x lies in sw. or ctr. A. The functional tape is on interpo- A _ | 7654
lator I. Determine f(x) and deliver it to ctr. B.
62
841
A 763
B 73
7
2, x lies in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A. The functional tape A 76541 132
is on interpolator II, Determine f(-x) and deliver it to
ctr, B. 62
841
A 163 32

Continued on next page
186

CODING
2. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
B 73
q
3. x liesin ctr. A. The functional tape is_on interpolator II. A 76542 |2
Determine f([xl) and deliver it to ctr. B.
62
841
A 763 2
B 73
7

(9) _ An addition, reset, reading to a print counter or any other operation not involving the multiply-
divide unit or the interpolators may be inserted in the last line of interpolation coding. The
typewriters may be turned on or off in the next to the last line of interpolation coding (line re-
setting the interpolation check counter),

OUT IN MISC.
4. x liesinctr. A. The functional tape is on interpolator I. A 7654 1

Determine f(-Ix!) and deliver it to ctr. B. Reset cir.C
in the last line. Turn off typewriter II. 62

841

A 163 1

8731 B 73

c Cc vi

(10) Occasionally when the interpolator positioning time is very short (the same or the next argu-
ment) it may be desirable to use the computation time to cover one or more prints, The quantity
to be printed must be read to the print counter before the interpolation is initiated as shown

below.
OUT IN MISC.
5, Print the quantity in ctr. C on typewriter I during compu- Cc 7432
tation time, x lies in ctr. A. The functional tape is on
interpolator II. Determine f(x) and deliver it to ctr. B. A 76541
62
841
A 763 7

Continued on next page
187

INTERPOLATORS
5. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
752
B 73
7
6. Print the quantities in ctrs. C and D on typewriters I and Cc 7432
Il. x lies in ctr. A. The functional tape is on interpo-
lator Il. Determine f(x) and deliver it to ctr. B. D 74321
752° 7
A 76542
62
841
A 763 7
7
Repeat this line (blank,
blank, 7) a sufficient num-
ber of times so that the
positioning time plus
these lines cover 23
cycles,
7
7521
B 73
7

(11) It may be desirable to carry on calculations not involving the interpolators after interpolation
is initiated and during tape positioning time, In this case sufficient cycles must be inserted to
cover more than the maximum tape positioning time of the given problem, The maximum tape
positioning time for interpolation of order k is

P =8 + N(k + 2)/2

where
N =the number of arguments to be covered
k + 1 =the number of interpolational coefficients including Cy .

(12) If operations are inserted during tape positioning time, the read-in of the argument to the in-
terpolator in the first line of coding may not be altered by any operational code such as the
invert code,
188

CODING
ouT IN MiSsC.
7, x lies in sw.or ctr. A. The functional tape is on interpo- A 7654 61
lator I. Determine f(x) and deliver it to ctr. B. Insert
other operations during tape positioning time. 762
Other computations in-
serted here must cover
tape positioning time.
841 7654
A 763
B 73
q
8. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Ctr.C is available for compu- A Cc 732
tation. The functional tape is on interpolator II. Deter-
mine f{(-x) and deliver it to ctr. B. Insert other oper- Cc 76541 | 61
ations during tape positioning time.
762
Other computations in-
serted here must cover
tape positioning time.
841 76541
Cc 763
B 73
7

(i3) If operations are inserted during tape positioning time, a 641 code in the Miscellaneous column
will insure that the tape will position to the closest lower value of the argument rather than to
the closest value of the argument, The positioning of the tape to the closest lower value may

he ucad toa salact data ac in garn ardor intarnolation

be used to select data as in zero order interpolation, -
OUT IN MISC.
9. A tape is punched xj, f(x1), x9, f(xg),.... x lies in sw. A 7654 641
or ctr. A, It is required to determine f(x,) where ;
X, = X< X, , 1 and deliver it to ctr. B. Insert other 762
operations during tape positioning time, The tape is -
on interpolator I. Other computations in-

serted here must cover
tape positioning time.

3

85 733

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

189

INTERPOLATORS

A tape designed for an odd function need only be punched for positive values of the argument
and counter 70 may be used to determine the sign of the result.

OUT IN MISC.
10. A tape for f(x) = - f(-x) is on interpolator II. x lies in A 732 7
ctr. A. It is required to determine f(x) and deliver it
to ctr. B. Ctrs, 70 and C are reset and available for use. A 16541 |2
62
841
A 763 2
Cc 73
Cc B 7432

All functional tapes and value tapes should be checked as described in the section on the design
of functional tapes before being used in a computation.

No switch setting or plugging is required for the use of a value tape since the values are read
directly into the buss, If the decimal point of a value tape is not the same as the operating
decimal point of the machine, the values must be routed through either the LIO or SIO counter
to shift them to the proper position,

Selected coefficients may. be read out of a functional tape as if it were a value tape. The argu-
ments cannot be read out because of the argument code punched in the first column,

Since the sequence control tape may contain coding to step the interpolators ahead or back and
to read values from the tape, the value tape must be synchronized with the control tape, There-
fore, the starting position of a value tape must be clearly indicated, ,

The codes selecting the interpolator from which values are to be read are 85, 851 and 852 in
the Out column for interpolators I, II and Ill respectively.

The codes stepping the interpolators ahead are 753, 7531 and 7532 in the Miscellaneous column
for interpolators I, II and III respectively.

The codes stepping the interpolators back are 754, 7541 and 7542 in the Miscellaneous column
for interpolators I, If and ITI respectively.

OUT IN MISC.
11, Step interpolator I ahead, , 753
12, Step interpolator II back, 7541
13, Read the value from interpolator III to ctr. B. 852 7
B 7

190

(22)

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
14, Step interpolator I ahead and read the value to ctr. A. 85 753
A 7
15. Step interpolator II back and read the value to ctr. A. 851 7541
A 7
16. Read the value from interpolator II to ctr. A, and step 852 7
ahead.
A 7532
17. Read the value from interpolator I to ctr. A, and step 85 7
back.
A 754
If it is desired to read successive values, n+ 1 cycles are necessary to read out n values,
OUT IN MISC.
18, Read five successive values from a tape on interpolator I, 851 a
supposing the tape to be standing on the first value, to ctrs,
A, B, C, D and E, and step the tape to the next value. 851 A 7531
851 B 7531
851 Cc 7531
851 D 7531
E 7534
4A funct tion f(u}, such as a series of constants, is punched in a tape where n is the number of
the entry in the tape. The following examples illustrate the selection of data from such a tape,
OUT IN MISC.
_19. Assuming the tape is on interpolator III and standing on 1542
f(n), read f(n - 2), 2f(n), f(n + 1), f(N + 2) to ctrs. A, B,C
and D respectively and leave the tape on f(n + 2). 852 1542
A 7532
852 7532

Continued on next page
191

INTERPOLATORS
19. (continued) . OUT IN MISC.
852 B 7
852 B 7532
852 Cc 7532
D 7
20. Assuming the tape is on interpolator I and'standing on 753
f(n - 2) read f(n), fn + 1) and f(n + 2) to ctrs. A, B and
C respectively and leave the tape on {(n). 85 753
85 A 753
85 B 753
754
754
(24) The coefficients may be read from a functional tape using these codes.
OUT IN MISC,
21. Position the tape on interpolator II to the argument next A 76541 |641
lower than x in ctr. A and read the three interpolational
coefficients to ctrs, B, C and D. 762

Other computations in-
serted here must cover
tape positioning time.

73
851 7531
851 B 7531
851 c 7531
D 7

(25) Several values at known intervals may be read out in zero order interpolation, The tape is
punched x,, {(x,), Xo, f(Ky), .

OUT IN MISC.

22, If the tape is on interpolator II, and x,=x<x, , 4.x A 76542 |641
lies in ctr. A, read f(x, ~ 1)» £(&,), fq, +1) to ctrs.C, D

and E respectively. Insert sufficient operations to cover 762

tape positioning time. Leave the tape standing on an

argument, Continued on next page

192

(26)

(27)

CODING
22. (continued) OUT IN MISC.

Other computations in-

serted here must cover

tape positioning time.

73

852 7542
Cc 7532

852 1532
D 7532

852 7532
E 7532

The interpolators may be used to evaluate any function of the form

f(x) = C, + Cate) + C(e) Ps C, ee) ——

where g(x) is any function of x computed in the machine. The functional tape is punched as
usual with the argument and the coefficients Cy, Cy _ 1) «s+ Cp, in that order, Plugging must
be checked for the complete read-in to the intermediate counter, This saves the build-up time
in each multiplication of the computation of the series, If the C,, are functions of x, then x
would usually have to be an integral multiple of the tape interval, ax, If the C, are constants,
the argument line is not punched except for the argument code.

OUT IN MISC.
23. x lies inctr. A. g(x) Hes in ctr. B, The tape is on (A) 7654
interpolator I. Evaluate f(x) as defined above and
deliver f(x) to ctr. C. Omit (A) in the first line if the 62
C, are constants.
B 763
Cc 73
7

if it is not desirable to cover tape-positioning time and if it is necessary to initiate operations
other than the usual interpolation sequence as soon as the proper argument is located, the tape
selection relays may be dropped out by the two lines of coding (blank, blank, 761; blank, blank,
762) immediately following the first two normal lines of coding.

OUT IN MISC.

24. From the value tape on interpolator I read out two functions A 7654
associated with the argument x, which lies in ctr, A. Store
the functions in ctrs. B and C, Leave the tape on an argu- 62
ment.

Continued on next page
(28)

(29)

193

INTERPOLATORS

24, (continued) OUT IN MISC.

761

162

3

85 753

85 B 753

Cc 753

The two dial switches above an interpolator need not be set alike, The right dial switch must
be set to the number of values accompanying an argument in the tape in order to position the
tape. The left dial must be set to the number of these values to be used in the interpolation
computation.

OUT IN MISC.

25. On interpolator I there is a functional tape with seven A 7654
coefficients to be used on a problem where five coef-
ficients will give the necessary accuracy. Set the right: 62
dial switch to seven and the left dial switch to five.
After locating the argument, drop out the tape selection 761
relays, step twice to eliminate C, and C, from the com-
putation, and proceed to interpolate using C 4 to Cy: Ctr. 762
A contains x. Deliver f(x) to ctr. B.
753
753
841 7654
A 763
B 73
7

Special problems may require unusual applications of the interpolators, For example, "h"
correction-2 or "h" correction-3 may be stored in counter C by the line of coding (841, C,
blank) in conjunction with special wiring. See Plugging Instructions, The interpolator sequence
can be used for shifting or clipping numbers by plugging the intermediate counter for the proper
shift and using.a tape punched with three repeated lines reading (a) argument code only, (b)
unity, (c) blank. In this case no Out code is used on the first line and on the third line the Out
code is for the counter containing the number to be shifted,

Multiple Use of Interpolators

(30)

When two or three functions have the same range of the independent variable and can be repre-
sented to the desired accuracy with the same interval of the argument and the same number of
interpolational coefficients punched with the same decimal point, the functional tapes will be
194

(31)

(32)

(33)

CODING

identical except for the numerical values of the coefficients, Under these circumstances, it
may be desirable to position two or three tapes simultaneously. Only one tape positioning is

coded in the main sequence tape and the "Interpolator gang-positioning switches" control the
positioning of the one or two remaining tapes.

This coding involves the operational code 61 in the Miscellaneous column. Therefore the read-
in of the argument may not be subject to an operational code and sufficient cycles must be in-
serted to cover maximum tape positioning time,

Other calculations may be performed between the computations of the several interpolations or
not as desired.

It should be noted that the number of interpolational coefficients may be made identical by in-
cluding zero coefficients, See Design of Functional Tapes. (Such zero coefficients consume

only four cycles of machine time.)
CUT IN MISC.
26. x lies in sw. or ctr. A. Read f(x), g(x) and h(x) from A 7654 61
interpolators I, II and III to ctrs. B, C,and D respectively.
Use interpolator I as a control for positioning the three 762

tapes simultaneously.
Other computations in-
serted here must cover
tape positioning time.

841 7654
A 763
B 7

Other computations of
any length, if desired.

841 76541
A 763
Cc 7

J

Other computations of
any length, if desired.

841 76542
A 763
DB %

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

195
DESIGN OF FUNCTIONAL TAPES
The interpolators are designed for all orders of interpolation up to and including the eleventh
order. ;
Interpolation is carried out by means of the interpolational polynomial:
aw 2
f(a + h)@ Co +C,h+ coh + ee

where

x =a+h, the amount standing in a given storage counter for which f(x) is to be com-
puted,

a = the argument in the tape which most closely approximates x and for example:

Co = f(a), ..., om = f(a) /x! .

Numbers are punched in a functional tape in accordance with a four row code discussed in the
physical description of the machine,

Negative arguments and coefficients are punched.as complements on nine, It is desirable that
tapes be designed with the decimal point between columns 15 and 16 unless the accuracy desired
requires more decimal places.

The punched arguments are distinguished from all other values by the argument code punched
in the lowest order machine column,

The values of the argument, a, must be punched in columns 15, 16, 17, 18 and 24 (for the alge-
braic sign), the lowest order column of the argument being punched in the fifteenth column, The
maximum range of the argument must be encompassed in four powers of ten, The interval of
the argument must be a power of ten, positive or negative; i.e.,4a = 10", Hence the maximum
value of h is 0.5 x 108, A tape must include an even number of arguments. When using a func-
tional tape, one half the number of arguments, N/2, must be set up in the push button switches
labeled "Value tape set up 1/2 "A" values in tape" above the interpolator.

For each value of the argument the values punched in the tape in order are:
the argument and the argument code in the first column,
the coefficient Cy,
the coefficient C, _ ,,
the coefficient Cy,
the coefficient Co-

The number of interpolational coefficients (including Co); k+1, is set in the dial switches
labeled “Set up number of "C" values on each switch",

The interpolators require plugging to care for the argument, the decimal point, the "h" cor-
rection and the "C" values, If the tape contains negative "C" values, the decimal point may not
be shifted to the right, The highest order "h"; i.e., the number of the column containing 10-1,
must be specified for the proper plugging of functional tapes.
196

(8)

(10)

(12)

(13)

CODING

The maximum tape positioning time (one half the length of the tape) for interpolation of order

Le ta

K ib
P=84+N(k+2)/2 cycles,
where
N = number of arguments punched in tape,
k + 1 = number of interpolational coefficients including Cy-
The computation time for interpolation of order k is
C= 7+k(4+n') cycles,

where

_k+1 = number of interpolational coefficients including Co,

n' =n if the maximum number of digits in any interpolational coefficient is even, 2n,
or n' =n+1 if the maximum number of digits in any interpolational coefficient is odd, 2n+ 1,

The design of a functional tape for interpolation of order k involves the specification of:

the accuracy of the tape,

the range of the argument and any special coding devices by which the range may be in-
creased,

. the interval of the argument,

. the number of arguments, N.

. the number of interpolational coefficients, k + 1,

. the tape decimal point,

we
ry

& on te OD

For any specific range of the argument and any predetermined accuracy, a function may be
represented by a functional tape in several different ways, Many interpolational coefficients
may be used with large intervals of the argument, giving a short tape, brief positioning time,
but long computationtime, On the oiher hand,a smaii iniervai of the argument with few interpo-
lational coefficients will result in short computation time but longer positioning time. In general,
a tape should he so designed that the sum of the mean positioning time and the computation time
will be a minimum, If, however, it is known that the successive arguments for which interpo-
lation is to be performed differ but little from one another, the positioning time is small in any
case, and it will be more effective to design the tape for minimum computation time. If the
variable is random and expected to vary by large increments, it is desirable to design the tape
so that positioning time is a minimum and spend a ionger time on computation. Thus the design
of a functional tape is governed in the main by three factors: accuracy, tape positioning time
and computation time,

In computing the accuracy of a tape, if k is the index of the last interpolational coefficient, k is
determined by

[ee

i
r= ay Cc; (h max)

where the remainder, r, must be less than one half unit in the lowest order column required to
give the desired accuracy. When Taylor's series is used, k is determined by

r=, , y(n max)/+}

taking for Cc, et its maximum value as a function of x in the range under e
197

DESIGN OF FUNCTIONAL TAPES

As an example of the design of a functional tape consider f(x) = arctan x (principal values),
By a coding device employing the identities

arc tan (-x) = - are tan x
and

arc tan|x|= 7/2 - arc tan 1/|x|,
a tape covering the arguments 0 = x <1 may be extended to cover interpolation for
-®=xs+00, Using Taylor's series, the coefficients of the interpolational polynomial

are

Co = f(a) = arc tana

C, = f'(a) =
1 1+ a?

c. = fifa). __-a

20a (tae

_ f(a) 3a? 1
34 8(1 4 a2)

C, = f%(a) = aca?

45° (14024
_ 1a) _ 1- 10a” + 5a4
51 (1 + aye

Cs

The absolute value of all coefficients is less than or equal to one.
The following table shows the calculations for accuracy, tape positioning time in cycles
and computationtime in cycles, The accuracy desired is an error of not more than 5x 10-8
and the tape is punched with decimal point between columns 9 and 10,

Calculations for Tape for f(x) = arc tan x

Tape number I ng 8G

Interval of argument 0.1 0.01 0.001

Range of arguments Osxail.l [0=x=1.01 | O=x <1.001

Number of arguments = N 12 102 1002

C, (h max) 5x10] 5x10° 5x10-
2 ~4 -6 -8

Cy (h max) 8.125 x 10 |8.125 x 10 8.125 x 10

198

(14)

CODING

Calculations for Tape for f(x) =are tan x (continued)

Tape number I Il pea
Cg (h max)? 42x10-° | 4.2x1078 | 4.2x107"
C4 (h max)4 j 25x10° | 25x10 "| 25x10"
C, (h max)® 63x10 | 63x10!°| 63x10
Number of coefficients = k + 1 6 3 3
Tape positioning time in cycles...

Maximum 50 212 2012

Mean 29 110 1010
Computation time in cycles 52 25 25
Interpolation time in cycles...

Maximum 102 237 2037

Mean 81 135 1035
Error of tape 4x10 | a3x10° | 43x10"

Since the number of coefficients required for the desired accuracy varies with the argument,
compuiaiion time may be saved by punching zeroes in place of the higher coefficients for values
of the argument not requiring as many terms ofthe series. Since the MC is held constant during
the computation, a multiplication by zero consumes only four cycles in such cases,

2. For example, consider f(x) = arc sin x. The tape is to be punched for 0= x= 0.9, the in-
tervals of the argument being 0.01.

Calculations for Tape for f(x) =arc sin x

arg Cy (h max) Ce (h max)? Ce. (h max)® Cy (h max)!
0 a 2.95 x 10718 ny

0.1 2.45 x 10711 2.65 x 10713 5.30 x 10-16

0.2 5.56 x 10-11 3.73 x 10713 1.36 x 10715

0.3 1.04 x 10-10 6.24 x 10718 3.07 x 10715

0.4 1.91 x 10710 1.21 x 10-12 7.34 x 10715

0.5 3.74 x 10-10 2.71 x 10-12 2,02 x 10-14

0.6 8.31 x 10-10 7.38 x 10-12 6.97x 10714

0.7 2.30 x 10-9 2.70 x 10711 3.37 x 10713

0.8 9.56 x 107% 1.68 x 19710 3.12 x 19-12 6.20 x 10715
0.9 1.09 x 1077 3.81 x 1079 1.32 x 10710 5.62 x 10-11

(15)

(16)

(17)

199

DESIGN OF FUNCTIONAL TAPES

Thus a tape with an error of e 6x 10-11 que to the termination of the Taylor's series
would be punched with the following coefficients:

0 saxs0.2 a, 0, 0, 0, C3, Cy, Cy,Cp
0.2<axs0.7 a, 0, 0, Cy, C3, Cy, Cy,Co
0.7<a<0.8 a, 0, Cr, Cy; C3, Co; Cy; Cy
08<a=09 a, Cg» Cy, C4, Cy, Co, Cy; Co

Thus for random values of x, Tape I is the most effective. If, however, it were known that
the values of x were increasing and that in no case was Ax =0,1, the positioning time of
Tape II would be reduced to 48 cycles or less, giving a maximum interpolation time of only
76 cycles and making Tape II the more efficient, For the desired accuracy, Tape III is ob-
viously inefficient.

With the possible exception of very elementary functional tapes, the values of the interpolation
coefficients should be computed on the calculator itself . Hence the design of a functional tape
involves the coding of a sequence tape for its preparation.

To facilitate punching of the functional tape, the sequence tape calculating the coefficients should
be so coded that it prints the argument, followed by the coefficients in the order Cy, C. arcs
Cy, Co- Negative numbers should be printed as complements on nine,

Before the functional tape is used in a calculation, there are two checks which should be made
using the calculator, The interpolator should be required to position on each argument and to
print out the successive coefficients (the argument cannot be printed from the tape because of
the argument code in the first column), This set of coefficients should then be proof-read
against the computed coefficients, The coding for the sequence tape to accomplish this, if the
functional tape has three interpolational coefficients, is given in example 3,

3. Test arguments and read out three coefficients, OUT IN MISC.
Functional tape on interpolator I.
87
accumulate argument in cir, 1 8431 1 7
position tape - 1 7654
62
drop out tape selection relays "61
762
reset interpolation check counter 73
print argument on typewriter [ 1 1432
752 6
step ahead, read and print Cy 85 753
7432
752 6

Continued on next page
200

3.

CODING
(continued) OUT IN MISC.
Step ahead, read and print Cc, 85 153
7432
752 6
Step ahead, read and print C 0 85 753
7432
152 6
87

The cperating instructions for this tape must include plugging instructions for interpolator
I and typewriter 1, as well as the following instructions:

. Reset counter i before starting.

A
B, Set IVS for first value of the argument,
C. Start machine and press 87 stop key.
D

. If interpolator does not position, check tape to see that first argument and argument
code are in proper position, If these are correct, test interpolator.

E, When machine stops on 87, reset IVS to 1x 10° where sa = 10", Restart machine,

F, For each argument the interpolator may fail to position, If the interpolator does not
position, check tape to see that the appropriate argument and argumeni code are in
proper position.

The interpolator should also be required to interpolate on assigned values of x which can
be checked against tables. In general, it is wise to check the mid-values, since these give
rise to approximately the maximum error, The coding for such a tape is given in example4,

Test interpolation, Tape on interpolator I. OUT IN MISC.
87
reset ctr, 2 2 2 7
accumulate argument in ctr. 1 8431 1 7
position and interpolate 1 7654
62
841
1 763

201

DESIGN OF FUNCTIONAL TAPES

4, (continued) OUT IN MISC.
read f(x) to ctr. 2 2 %3
7
print x on typewriter I 1 7432
752 6
print f(x) on typewriter I 2 7432
752 6
87

The operating instructions for this tape must include plugging instructions for interpolator
I and typewriter I, as well as the following instructions:

A. Reset counter 1 before starting.

B, For the first round of sequence tape set IVS equal to the first value to be checked, then
change to Ax, If it is desired to interpolate on mid-values on a tape starting with argu-
ment zero, set IVS = 5x 102-1 for the first round and IVS = 10" thereafter, where
Aa = 10,

(18) One interpolator can be made to serve for several functions by subjecting the arguments to a
linear transformation and punching them in a single tape, In this case, the interval of the
transformed arguments and the number of interpolational coefficients must be equal for all
functions, The number of interpolational coefficients may of course be made identical by using
zero coefficients which consume only four cycles of machine computation time,

A tape is to be designed for
y = f(x) Osa=x<b
y = g(x) O<c<x<d.,

The tape must be punched for

F(z) O=a=z<bd/c
where

F(z) = f(x) asz<b

F(z) = 0 z=b

F(z) = g(cz/b) b< z<bd/c

For y = f(x), the argument is read directly to the interpolator.
For y = g(x), z = bx/c is read to the interpolator as the argument.

Care must be taken in selecting the limits a, b, c and d of the functions, so that the interpo-
lator is not required to position to the argument z = b.
202

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

METHODS OF DIF FERENCING

In calculating the successive differences of a function, three schemes for the use of counters
are available. To calculate nth differences, the first method consumes 3n cycles and uses n

counters, The second or "round-robin" method covers n +2 cycles, uses n+ 1 counters, and
must be repeated n+1 times, The third method covers 2n+2 cyclesand uses n+ 1 counters,

If a computation includes sufficient multiplication and division so that many lines are free for
interposed operations, and if there is a shortage of counters, the first method is appropriate,

If the coding is tight and if the computation is brief so that repetition will not make too long a
tape, the second method is more efficient,

In most other eases except first order differencing, the third method is most useful, Note that
this method provides a simple check on the result,

The first method is coded to compute and print fifth differences,

‘1, The vaiue u, lies in ctr. P and may therefore be inverted when read out, and

counter A = u_j
counter B = Au_g
counter C = Afu_3
counter D = A%u_4
counter E = 4*u_s.

OUT IN MISC.

- Up to ctr. A; A=-AU_y P A 732
- 4u_, toctr.B; B= -0"u_» A B 7
- wus to ctr.C; C = -s5u_s B Cc 7
- tus to ctr.D; D= stu, c D 7
- atu to ctr. E; E = -0?u_s D E 7
print au 5 on typewriter I E 7432 32

752 6
reset ctr, E E E i
Aa 4 to ctr, E D E 732
reset ctr. D D D 7
au_g to ctr. D c D 732
reset ctr. C Cc Cc 7
au, to ctr. C B Cc 732
reset ctr. B B B 7

Continued on next page
203

METHODS OF DIFFERENCING

1, (continued) OUT IN MISC.
Au_, tocir.B A B 732
reset ctr, A A A 7
u 0 to ctr. A : Pp A 7

2, The value u, lies in a value tape or arises from any sources from which the read-out
cannot be inverted, and

counter A = -u_y
counter B = -Au_o
counter C = -atu_s
counter D = -a3u_4

= 5

counter E - A4a_
OUT IN MISC.

uptoctr.A; A=Au_, Pp A 7
Au, toctr.B; B=a%_, A B 7
Atu_y to ctr.C; C = a3u_s B c 7
a3u_g toctr.D; D = atu, Cc D 7
Atu_, to ctr, E; E = a®u_s D E 7
print Au_s on typewriter I E 7432

752 6
reset cir. E E E 7
~A4u_4 to ctr. E D E 732
reset ctr. D D D q
- 3u_g to ctr. D c D 732
reset ctr. C Cc Cc 7
~a®u_g to ctr. C B c 732
reset ctr. B B B 7
-Au_, toctr. B A B 732
reset ctr. A A A 7
-U to ctr. A Pp A 732

(6) The "round-robin" method is coded to compute and print third differences.
204

CODING

Successive values of the function are delivered from a value tape, card feed or ctr. P and

counter A = -au4
counter B = A2u_3
counter C = -Au_g
counter D = u_y

reset ctr. A
Up to ctr. A

-U, to ctr. D; D = -au_y

Au_, toctr.C; C = nu_s

- atu» to ctr. B; B= -Su

2 3
print a U_s

reset ctr. B

uy to ctr. B

-Uy to ctr, A; A = -Allg

Aly to ctr. D; D= uy
-a2u_y to ctr. C; C = -a4u_s

print Su»

reset ctr. C

Ug to ctr. C

“Ug to ctr. B; B= -Avy
Au, to ctr, A; A = azuy

- Au, to ctr. D; D = -a3u_y

print a%u_,

reset ctr. D

Ug to ctr. D

OUT IN MISC.
A A 7
P A 7
A D 732
D c 732
Cc B 732
B 7432 32
752 6
B B 7
Pp B 7
B A 732
A D 732
D c 732
Cc 7432 32
752 6
Cc Cc 7
P Cc 7
c B 732
B A 732
A D 732
D 7432 32
752 6
D D q
D 7

Continued on next page

205

METHODS OF DIFFERENCING

3. (continued) , OUT | IN MISC.
-Ug to ctr.C; C = -Aug D c 132
Aug to ctr. B; B= amu, |e B 732
- "uy to ctr. A; A= - aug B A 132
print Su, A 7432 «| 32

752 6

(7) The third method is coded to compute and print fifth differences.
4, Successive values of the function are delivered from a value tape, card feed or ctr. P and

counter A = uy
counter B = Au_g
counter C = A203
counter D = Avu.4
counter E = Atu_s
counter F = Au_g .

OUT IN MISC.

reset ctr. F F F 7
- atu_s to ctr. F E F 732
- a%u_g to ctr, F D F 732
-a*u_g to ctr. F Cc F 732
~Au_y to ctr. F B F 732
-u_, toctr. F A F 732
ug to ctr. F; F= A°u_s P F 7
print A°u_s on typewriter I F 7432

752 6
Adu_s to ctr. E; E = tug F E 7
atu_4 to ctr. D; D= A3u_3 E D q
A3u_g to ctr.C; C= Atu_o D Cc 7
A*u_9 to ctr.B; B=Auly Cc B q
Au_, toctr.A; A = Ug B A q

Note that an excellent check on the accuracy of the differencing process can be made in
three additional cycles by checking Uy in A against P,
206

(1)

(3)

CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

"A centrai-difference formula terminating at a mean difference of the entry Ug is more accu-
rate than a formula which is curtailed at the corresponding difference of u_ , and it is
less accurate than a formula which is curtailed at the corresponding difference of uj ;9 "
Whittaker and Robinson, The Calculus of Observations, 3rd ed., London, 1940, p. 49.

Thus the Newton-Bessel formula is more accurate as far as mean differences of even order
when further terms are neglected than the corresponding Newton-Stirling formula, In the same
way Newton-Stirling is more accurate as far as mean differences of odd order,

If interpolation is being performed on third differences, the Newton-Stirling formula is the more
accurate since it terminates in mean third differences, Since operations are inserted during
tape positioning time and interposed during multiplication, the cost of including the term con-~
taining the fourth difference is but one multiplication, Because of this gain in accuracy, the
formula has been coded to include the fourth difference term, The computations of the coef-
ficient, fourth difference and the completed term have been underlined so that they may easily
be omitted if desired, For even differences the same considerations apply to the use of the
Newton-Bessel formula,

4+he

s+ >= <r! tance

3 asecumes in = eetinn 2 eam nm tan ic ns os +h 12 <
. tis assumed in this section that a table of some function, f, is given, and that a value tape has

been punched with anargument of the form a+kw, followed by the value of the function f(a+kw),
for k = 0,1, ..., 9, and all values of a required, The integer n and the parameters a and w
are fixed, for a particular case, and are connected by the relations w = 10-1, n £ 0,Aa = 10w.
It is now desired to compute f(y) by interpolation, where y is within the range of the arguments
on the tape, The coding first puts the argument y in the form a+xw, where x is now not
necessarily an integer, and where 0<x <10,

The value y is sent to the interpolator to position the tape to the tape argument, a, immediate-
ly below it; i.e., such that 0 = y - a <10w, The tape positioning time, which must he covered,
since the tape is being positioned to the next lower value of the argument, is used to determine
x and the coefficients involving x. If the tape positioning time cannot be covered, the usual
coding is used and the first column of the interpolation counter is not plugged, See Plugging
Instructions,

The method of computation of x during tape positioning time, when a is still unknown and w is
a power of ten, is shown below,

(a) If w = 107", n a positive integer or zero, then a + xw is shifted n columns to the left by
passing it through the LIO counter, The LIO counter is plugged for such a shift except that
the plugging is omitted in the columns above one to the left of the decimal point and nines
are plugged into the first n machine columns of the buss, This will finally give x if y is
positive, and x - 10-P if y is negative, where the position of the decimal point is between
columns p and p +i. A correction is made by adding five in coiumn 24 and then subiraci-
ing five in column 24 under control of the choice counter, Thus x is the result in either
case,

1. a+xw lies in ctr, A; sw. P contains 5 in col, 24, Deliver x to ctr, B,

OUT IN MISC.

reset LIO ctr. 763
a+ xw to LIO ctr. A 765421 {7
reset ctr. B’ B B 7

Mantinuad an noavt nao
WUE Uli titval page
(5)

(6)

1.

(b)

207

CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

(continued) OUT IN MISC.
x to ctr.B 831 B 7
reset ctr. 70 732 732 q

- (a + xw) to ctr. 70 A 732 732

5 in 24th column to ctr, B Pp B 7

5 in 24th column to ctr. B under control of ctr. 70 Pp B 7432

If w = 10", n a positive integer, itis in most cases better to normalize the units of the
argument and of the function to include this in the previous case,

In the coding which follows it is assumed that Aa = 0,1 in the tape, and that the tape is on
interpolator I, It is also assumed that the successive values of a + xw appearing in the compu-
tation do not differ by more than one unit, If they differ by more than one unit more cycles
must be added to cover tape positioning time. If it is known that the values of a + xw occur in
close succession, it might be profitable to defer at least a part of the computation of the coef-
ficients until the tape has positioned, and use these multiplications to cover the differencing.
This is particularly true of computations involving the higher order differences,

For interpolation extending through third or fifth differences, the Newton-Bessel formula was
used:

2.

f(a + xw) = 1/2 (f(a) + f(a+ w)] + (x - 1/2) af(a) + xx) 1/2 [Prt ~w)+ a ta)]
+ x(x - UG - 1/2) .3t(a - w)+ (x + tate 1)(x - 2) 1/2 [a4t(a - 2w) + a4f(a - w)

+ (K+ Ux(x - 1)(x - 2x - 1/2)

51 f(a - 2w) +...

a+xw lies inctr, A. f(a + xw) is to be delivered to ctr, L, Ctrs, B through L, 70 and LIO
are available for computation, but not reset. Switches are set as follows:

Switch SP = 1/2

Switch SQ = 1.0

Switch SR = 1/4

Switch SS = 2/3

Switch ST = 5 in machine column 24.

Coefficients for and computation of third differences which may be omitted are underlined.
(7)'s must be omitted if no operations are interposed,

OUT IN MISC.

(a + xw) to interpolator I A 7654 641

interpolator I positions 762

Continued on next page
208

CODING

(continued)

reset LIO ctr.

(a + xw) to LIO ctr.

reset ctr. B

x toctr.B

reset ctr. 70

- (a + xw) to ctr. 70

5 in column 24 to ctr. B

} 5 in column 24 to ctr. B under control of ctr. 70

reset ctr. M.

x toctr.M
x toMC
- 1 to ctr. B

reset ctr. C
(x - 1) to MP
1/2 to ctr. P
reset ctr. D
reset ctr. E
reset ctr. F
x(x - 1) to ctr.C
x(x - 1) to MC
reset ctr. N
reset ctr.G
1/4 to MP
reset ctr. H
reset ctr.I

reset ctr. J

OUT IN MISC.
783
A 765421 | 7
1B B 7
831 B 7
732 132 7
A 732 732
ST B 7
ST B 7432
M M 7
B M 7
B 761 7
SQ B 732
Cc Cc
M 7
SP P 7
D D 7
E E 7
F F
Cc 7
c 761 7
N 7
G G
SR 7
H H 7
I I 4
J J 7

Continued on next page

CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

(continued)

reset ctr, K

x(x - 1)/4 to ctr. N
x(x - 1)/4 to MC

- 1/2 to ctr. P

x toctr.P

(x - 1/2) to MP

x(x - 1)(x - 1/2) /4 to ctr. D

x(x - 1)( - 1/2)/4 to MC

reset ctr. L
reset ctr. Q
2/3 to MP

x(x - 1)(x - 1/2)/3! to ctr. Q

A check should be made to see that sufficient cycles have been inserted to cover interpo

lation positioning time,

interpolator I has positioned; reset IC
select interpolator I and step ahead
f(a) to ctr. E and step ahead

select interpolator I and step ahead

f(a + xw) to ctr. F and step back

209

OUT | IN | MISC.
K K
N 7
N 761 7
SP P 732
B P
P (7)
D a
D 761 7
L L 7
Q Q
S (7)
Q 1

73
85 753
E 153
85 753
F 154

Continued on next page
210

CODING
2, (continued) our | mn | Misc.

1/2to MC, step back sP  |76i | 754
{(a) to ctr. K, step back E K 754
f(a + w) to ctr. K, step back F K 54
[ sa) +f(at+ w)] to MP K 7
f(a +'w) to ctr, G. | F 7

- f(a) to ctr. G; G = af(a) E 732
select interpolator I 85 vin
f(a - w) to ctr. H, step ahead H 53
[#a) + f(a+ w)| /2 to ctr, L, step ahead L 153
(x - 1/2) to MC, step ahead Pp 761 753
- f(a) to ctr. H; H = -af(a - w) E H 732
Af(a) to ctr, H; H = A*f(a - w), step ahead G H 53
Af(a) to MP, step ahead G 753
select interpolator I, step ahead 85 753
f(a + 2w) to ctr. I I 7

- {(a + w) to ctr. 1; I = af(a + w) F I 732
- Af(a) to ctr. I; I = a"£(a) G I 32
(x - 1/2) af(a) to ctr. L L 7
x(x - 1)/4 to MC N’ 761 7
ata - w)toctr.] H J 7

a 4(a) to ctr. J I J

[2 f(a - w) + Aa] to MP vi
-af(a - w) to ctr. I: I = a°f(a - w) H I (7)32

Continued on next page
2.

CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

(continued)
x(x - 1) [a*e(a -w)+ a?ea)| /4 to ctr. L
x(x - 1)(x - 1/2)/38\ to MC

A°f(a - w) to MP

x(x - 1)(x - 1/2)a%t(a - w)/3! to ctr. L.
f(a + xw) lies in ctr. L.

211

OUT IN MISC.
L qT
@ jm |
I (D
L 7

(7) For interpolation extending through fourth differences, the Newton-Stirling formula was used:

f(a + xw)-= f(a) +x [af(a) + Af(a - w)| [2+ x2 2 ata - w)

3.

+ x(x" - 1?

VEN [34a -w)+ a*t(a - aw)| 2 + x2 (x? - 17) /41a4ta - 2w) +...

a+xw lies in ctr, A. f(a + xw) is to be delivered to ctr. L. Ctrs, B through N, 70 and

Switch SP = 1/2

Switch SQ = 5 in machine column 24
Switch SR = 1.0

Switch SS = 1/6

Switch ST = 1/12,

LIO are available for computation but not reset, Switches are set as follows:

Coefficients for and computation of fourth differences which may be omitted are under-

lined. (7)'s must be omitted if no operations are interposed,

(a + xw) to interpolator I
interpolator I postion
reset LIO ctr.

(a + xw) to LIO ctr.

OUT IN MISC,
A 7654 641
762
763
A 765421 | 7

Continued on next page
212

CODING

(continued)

reset ctr. B

x to ctr. B

reset ctr, 70

- (a + xw) to ctr. 70

5 in first column to ctr. B
5 in first column to ctr. B under control of ctr. 70
x to MC

reset cir. C

reset cir. D

x to MP

-1toctr.D

reset ctr.

reset ctr.

x to ctr.

E
F

reset ctr. G
Cc

x to MC

x2 to ctr.D; D= x" -1

reset ctr. H

1/2 to MP

reset ctr.I

reset ctr. J

reset ctr. K

reset ctr. P

x/2 to ctr. P

x? to MC

reset ctr. L

ouT IN MISC.

B B 7
831 B 7
732 732 7
A 732 732
SQ B 7
8Q B 7432
B 761 7

Cc 7
D D
BD 7
SR D 732
E E 7

F 7
G G

c 7
B 761 7
Cc D 7
H H
SP 7
I I 7

T 7

K K 7

P

P 7
Cc 761 7
L L 7

Continued on next page

CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

(continued)
“reset ctr.M
1/2 to MP

reset ctr. N
reset ctr. Q

x2 /2! to ctr. Q
(x? - 1) to MC

x/2 to MP

x(x? -1)/2toctr.E

x(x2 -1)/2to MC

1/6 to MP

reset ctr. U
x(x? ~ 1)/(2)(3!) to ctr. U
x2 2 to MC

213

OUT IN MISC.

M M
SP 7
N N (7)
Q Q

Q q
D 761 (7)
Pp (7)

E vi
E 761 (7)
ss 7
U

U 7
Q fm fim

Continued on next page
214

CODING

(continued)

(x? - 1) to MP

reset ctr. R

x" (x2 - 1)/2 toctr.R

x2(x2 - 1)/2 to MC

1/12 to MP

reset cir.S

x(x? - 1)/4! to ctr, §

A check should be made to see that sufficient cycles have been inserted to cover interpo

lation positioning time,

interpolator I has positioned, reset IC
select interpolator I and step ahead
i(a) to cir, F, siep ahead

select interpolator I and step ahead
f(a + w) to ctr. G, step back

f(a + w) to ctr. H, step back

- f(a) to ctr, H; H = af(a)

f(a) to ctr, L, step back

select interpolator I and step back

OUT IN MISC.
D 1
R
R |
R 761 \(7)
sT 1
s s
s 7

85

he

85

| 154

754

732

Q
rpm) me] a

754

85

754

Continued on next page
CENTRAL-DIFFERENCE INTERPOLATION

(continued)

f(a - w) to ctr. I, step back

~ f(a - w) toctr. F; F =af(a - w)
x/2 to MC, step back

f(a) to ctr. M_

Af(a - w) to ctr, M

Af(a) + Af(a - w) to MP

select interpolator I

f(a - 2w) to ctr. J, step ahead

- f(a - 2w) to ctr. 1; I =af(a - 2w)

- Af(a - w) to ctr. I; I =- A*t(a - 2w)
x/2 [af(a) + Af(a - w)| to ctr. L, step ahead
x2 /2! to MC, step ahead

- Af(a) to ctr. F;_ F =- A2t(a - w)
A“f(a - w) to ctr. K

A2t(a - w) to MP

- A@f(a - 2w) to ctr. K; K =a%f(a - 2w), step ahead
step ahead

step ahead

reset ctr. T, step ahead

(x2 /2")a28(a -w) to ctr. L, step ahead
select interpolator I
‘ta + 2w) to ctr, T

- f(a + w) to ctr. T; T =af(a + w)

- Af(a) to ctr. T; T = A*f(a)

- Ata - w) to ctr, T; T = ata - w)
x(x? - 1)/12 to MC

A%f(a - 2w) to ctr. N

215

OUT IN MISC.
I 754
I F 732
P 761 754
H M 7
F M
M 7
85 7
J 753
J I 732
F I 32
L 753
Q 761 753
H F 732
F K 32
F 732
I K 733
753
753
T T 53
L 753
85 7
T
G T 732
H T 732
F T 7.
E 761 7
K N 7

Continued on next page
216

CODING

3. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
A*f(a ~ w) to ctr. N T N
[ a38a - 2w) + a%f(a - w)| to MP N 7
- Ata - 2w) to ctr. T; T = adt(a - 2w) K T (71932
x(x2 - 1)/3! [a8t(a - 2w) + 43f(a - w)] /2 to ctr. L L 7
x2(x2 - 1)/4! to MC s 761 (7)
A4t(a - 2w) to MP T (7)
x2(x2 - 1)/4! aff(a - 2w) to ctr. L. L 7

i(a + xw) lies in cir. L.
(1)

(2)

(3)

217
INTERPOLATION BY NEWTON-GREGORY DIFFERENCE FORMULA
In certain cases the Newton-Gregory formula of interpolation is found convenient, It may be
used in the form
f(a + xw) =f(a) + x Af(a) + xe) Af(a) + xx - IN - 2) As(a)
+ XK - UG - 2)(x - 3) att(a) + X& ~ 1) - aye - 3)(x - 4) a*f(a) ...

It is assumed that a functional tape has been punched with the values
sees (a > 2w), f(a - 2w), (a _ w), f(a > w), a,
f(a), (a + w), f(a + w), (a+ 2w), f(a + 2w), ...

In the coding which follows, it is assumed that the interval of the arguments is 0.1 and that the
tape is on interpolator I, See Central-Difference Interpolation, note (5).

1, (a+xw) lies inctr. A. f(a +xw) is to be delivered to ctr.I, Ctrs. B through P, 70 and
LIO are available for computation but not reset. Switches are set as follows:

Switch SP = 5 in machine column 24
Switch SQ = 1/2
Switch SR = 1/3
Switch SS = 1/4
Switch ST = 1/5
Switch SU = 1/6
Switch SV = 1.0

The computation is carried to sixth differences,

OUT IN MISC.

(a + xw) to interpolator I A 7654 641
interpolator I positions : 762
reset LIO ctr. 763
(a + xw) to LIO ctr. A 765421 | 7
reset ctr. B B B 7

x toctr.B 831 B 7
reset ctr. 70 732 732 7

- {a + xw) to ctr. 70 A 732 732
5 in first col. to ctr. B sp B 7

+ 5 in first col. to ctr. B under control of ctr. 70 SP B 7432
reset ctr. C Cc Cc 7

Continued on next page
218

(continued)

x to MC

x to ctr.C

- 1 to ctr. C; C=x-1
x - 1to MP

reset ctr. D

reset ctr. E

reset ctr, F

x(x - 1) to ctr. D

ctr. Dto MC

reset ctr. Q

- ltoctr.C; C =x-2
1/2 to MP

reset ctr.G

reset ctr. H

reset ctr. I

x(x - 1)/2 to ctr. Q
ctr. Q to MC

reset ctr. J

reset cir. K

Vee te

(x - 2) toMP

reset ctr. L

reset ctr. M

reset ctr. N

x(x - 1)(x - 2)/2! to ctr. E
ctr. E to MC

reset ctr. R

CODING

OUT IN MISC.
B 761 7
B Cc 7
SV Cc 32
c 7
D D 7
E E 7
F F

D 7
D 761 7
Q Q 7
SV Cc 32
SQ 7
G G 7
H 7
I I

Q 7
Q 761 7
J J 7
K K
Cc 7
L L 7
M M 7
N N

E 7
E 761 7
R R 7

Continued on next page

INTERPOLATION BY NEWTON-GREGORY DIFFERENCE FORMULA

(continued)

- ltoctr.C; C=x-3
1/3 to MP

reset ctr.O

reset ctr. P

R(x - 1)(x - 2)/33

ctr. Rto MC

x-3toMP

X(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)/31to F
ctr. F to MC

reset ctr. S$

-ltoctr.C; C=x-4

1/4 to MP

x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)/4} to ctr. S

ctr. S to MC

x-4to MP

219

OUT IN. | MISC.
SV Cc 32
SR 7
fe) fe) 7
P P (7)

R 7
R 761 (7)
Cc (7)

F 7
F 71 =| 7
s Ss 7
SV Cc 32
ss (7)

s 1
8 761 (7)
Cc (7)

Continued on next page
220

CODING

(continued)

x(x - 1)(x ~ 2)(x - 8)(x - 4)/4! to ctr.G
ctr. G to MC

reset ctr. T

-ltoctr.C; C=x-5

1/5 to MC

x(x - 1)(x ~ 2) - 3) - 4)/5! to cir. T

ctr. T to MC

reset ctr. V

x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)(x ~ 4)(x - 5)! to ctr. H
ctr, H to MC

reset ctr. U

1/8 to MP

OUT In MISC.
G 7
G 761 7
T T 7
SV Cc 32
ST (7)
T "7
T 761 (7)
Vv Vv
(7)
H 7
H 761 7
U U (7)
SU (7)

Continued on next page

INTERPOLATION BY NEWTON-GREGORY DIFFERENCE FORMULA

(continued)

x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)(x - 4)(x - 5)/6! to ctr. U
reset IC

select interpolator I and step ahead
f(a) to J, step ahead

f(a) to V

select interpolator I and step ahead
f(a + w) to K, step ahead

x to MC, step ahead

f(a) to I

- f(a + w) to J; J =- af(a)

Af(a) to MP

select interpolator I

f(a + 2w) to L, step ahead

~ f(a + 2w) to K; K =- af(a+ w)
Af(a + w) to J; J =A“f(a)

x Af(a) to I, select interpolator I and step ahead
f(a + 3w) to M, step ahead

x{x - 1)/2! to MC, step ahead

- f(a + 3w) to L; L =- af(a + 2w)
Af(a + 2w) to K; K = Ata + w)
A*t(a) to MP

- f(a + w) to Js J = - a%e(a)

select interpolator I

f(a + 4w) to N, step ahead

- f(a + 4w) to M; M = - af(a + 3w)

221

ouT | IN | Isc.
U 7
73
85 753
753
I Vv 7
85 153
K 753
B 761 153
J i 7
K J 32
J 732
85 7
L 753
K 732,
K J 32
85 I 753
M 153
Q 761 7153
M L 732
L K 32
J 7
K J 732
85 q
N 753
N M 32

Continued on next page
222

CODING

(continued)

x(x - 1)/2! a2f(a) to I, step ahead
x(x - 1)(x -2)/3! to MC

Af(a + 3w) to L; L = atla + 2w)

- Ata + 2w) to K; K =- A%f(a + Ww)
A°f(a) to MP

Ata +w)toJ; J= a‘ f(a)

select interpolator I

f(a + 5w) to O, step ahead

- f(a + 5w) to N; N =- af(a + 4w)
x(x - 1)(x - 2)/3! a3£(a) to I, step ahead
x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)/41 to MC

Af(a + 4w) to M; M =af(a 4+ 3w)

- A3f(a + 3w) to L; L = - a%f(a + 2w)
A“f(a) to MP

Arta + 2w) to K; K =a4f(a + w}

- a4£(a + w) to J; J = - a5f(a)

select interpolator I

f(a + Gw) to P

x(x - i) - 2)(x - 3)/41 a4£(a) to 1
x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)(x - 4)/5! to MC
- f(a + 6w) to O; O = - af(a + Sw)
Af(a + Sw) to N; N = aRt(a + 4w)
A°£(a) to MP

- A@f(a + 4w) to M; M =- A%f(a + 3w)
Axt(a + 3w) to L; L =a4t(a + 2w)

- a4f(a + 2w) to K; K =- f(a + Ww)

OUT IN MISC.
I 753
R 761 7
M L 732
L K 32
732
K J 732
85 7
753
Qo N 32
I 753
s 761 7
N M 732
M L 32
7
K 732
K 732
85 7
P
I 7
T 761 7
P [e) 732
Oo N 32
J 732
N M 732
M 732
L K 732
Continued on next page

INTERPOLATION BY NEWTON-GREGORY DIFFERENCE FORMULA

(continued)

A°f(a + w) to J; J = a54(a)

x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)(x - 4)/4! a5£(a) to I
x(x - 1)(x - 2)(x - 3)(x - 4)(x - 5)/6! to MC

a®£(a) to MP

product to I

293

OUT | IN | MISC.
K J 32
I 7
U 761 (7)
J 7
I 7

224

(i)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)

(7)

SUBTABULATION

Ui a table exists giving values of a function for
the e funct

a
of calculating or a sm

tabulation.

certain interval of the argument, the process
aller interval of the argument is called sub-

Subtabulation is carried out by differencing the given function, then either interpolating on these
differences for the intervening functions or determining a new difference table for the smaller
tabular interval from which to build the functions,

If interpolation is to be used, the selection of a particular formula should be determined by the
following considerations:

(a) formulae which proceed to constant differences are exact,

(b) formulae which stop short of constant differences are not exact, but are approximate,

(c) approximate formulae terminating in the same difference are identical,

(d) approximate formulae terminating in distinct differences of the same order are not iden-
tical,

(e) central difference formulae terminating in a mean difference of order r are more exact
than formulae which terminate in a single difference of order r.

For purposes of machine computation, the central difference formulae are usually more con-
venient, In particular, to subtabulate to tenths, the Newton-Bessel central difference formula
is well adapted to machine computation. See note (6) of the previous section.

If yy +d) is the desired value of the function (0<d<h and h = x,7% )

n-1

y(Xq+ d) = Ano + y,) + AsAYq + Ag(e"y_, + a*y)
+ Ags*y_ + Ay(a*y_» + aty 4) + Aga”y_»
6 6 7. 8. 8
+ AAs Vig +A Y_») + ASA vat A,(a v4 +A v5) + wee

This form of the Newton-Bessel formula has the following advantages:

fa) the A; are short, terminating decimal fractions, thus reducing multiplication time and
eliminating errors arising from non-terminating coefficients,

(b) the values of the function for d/h = 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9 can be evaluated directly from the
computations for d/h = 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0,1, respectively, by appropriate reversals of sign,
thus almost halving the number of multiplications required,

{c) every second term in the function is zero when the value of the function for the half interval
d/b = 0.5 is computed,

The numerical values of the A; , for i = 0 through 8, are given in Table 1,

The Newton-Bessel formula should never be used without a careful examination of the error
introduced by neglecting the remainder. For references on this, see Bibliography, Subtabu-
lation.

The error due to the neglect of the remainder does not include the errors inherent in machine
computation; e.g., cutting off digits in products, These errors must be evaluated for the par-
ticular problem,
(8)

225

SUBTABULATION

Table 2 gives an example of the high accuracy which can be obtained using the Newton-Bessel
formula as given in note (4), In Table 2 the correct values of the function are given to 23
places of decimals, eighth differences were used, ten values of the function from 7.94 to 8.04
were used to subtabulate. The maximum error is but a few units in the 23rd decimal place,

TABLE 1
d/h 0.1 0.2 0.3
Ag 0.5 0.5 0.5
Ay -0.4 -0.3 -0.2
Ag -0.022 5 -0.04 -0.052 5
Ag 0.006 0.008 0.007
Ag 0.003 918 75 0.007 2 0.009 668 75
As -0,000 627 -0,000 864 -0,000 773 5
Ag -0.000 795 506 25 -0.001 478 4 -0,002 001 431 25
An 0.000 090 915 0.000 126 72 0.000 114 3675
Ag 0,000 171 744 1171875 0.000 321 024 0.000 436 383 492 187 5
d/h 0.4 0.5
Ao 0.5 0.5
Ay -0.1 The Aj, i odd, equal zero for d/h = 0.5.
Ag -0.06 -0.062 5
Ag 0.004
Ag 0.011 2 0.011 718 75
As -0.000 448
Ag -0,002 329 6 -0.002 441 406 25
Ay 0.000 066 56
Ag 0.000 509 184 0.000 534 057 617 1875
d/h = 0.6

The Ao, k = 0,1, 2, 3, 4, are identical with the corresponding values for d/h = 0.4.
The Ao, , 4,k = 0, 1, 2, 3, are the negatives of the corresponding values for d/h = 0.4.

d/h = 0.7

The Ay,, k = 0,1, 2, 3, 4, are identical with the corresponding values for d/h = 0.3.
The Ao, aD k = 0,1, 2, 3, are the negatives of the corresponding values for d/h = 0.3.

d/h = 0.8

The Ay» k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, are identical with the corresponding values for d/h = 0.2.
The Ao, , 4,k = 0, 1, 2, 3, are the negatives of the corresponding values for d/h = 0.2.

d/h = 0.9

The Ag,, k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, are identical with the corresponding values for d/h = 0.1.
The Ao, wD k = 0, 1, 2, 3, are the negatives of the corresponding values for d/h= 0.1,

226

CODING

TABLE 2

7.980
7.981
7.982
7.983
7,984

7.985
7.986
7.987
7.988
7.989

Correct Value of f(x)

1.763 147 388 660 678 723 1763
1.760 829 249 550 966 677 1468
1.758 509 640 161 486 144 '7192
1.756 188 562 959 490 626 2892
1.753 866 020 413 355 311 2638

1.751 542 014 992 574 599 4059
1.749 216 549 167 759 621 3753
1.746 889 625 410 635 758 4682
1.744 561 246 194 040 161 5585
1,742 231 413 991 919 269 2417

Subtabulated Values of f(x)

1.763 147 388 660 678 723 1763
1.760 829 249 550 966 677 1464
1,758 509 640 161 486 144 7188
1.756 188 562 959 490 626 2887
1.753 866 020 413 355 311 2633

1.751 542 014 992 574 599 4057
1.749 216 549 167 759 621 3753
1.746 889 625 410 635 758 4683
1,744 561 246 194 040 161 5586
1.742 231 413 991 919 269 2418

(1)

(2)

227
‘ INVERSE INTERPOLATION

The values of an argument in arithmetical sequence and the corresponding values of a function
are given in tabular form, Inverse interpolation is the process of finding the value of the argu-
ment corresponding to a value of the function intermediate between two tabular values,

The inversion of a functional table may conveniently be accomplished by iteration. One of sev-
eral iterative procedures is the following:

Let f(x) be a function tabulated for equal intervals of x. It is desired to retabulate this function
for equal intervals h of the variable y.

Assume that ©

x9 =f l(yq - 2h)
and
-1

are two values of x previously found to correspond to (y,

Oo” 2h) and (¥p ~h), It is required to
find

xy =f") -
A first approximation x (2) to Xq may be found from

(1)
Xp = xy +kh
where
X_j- xX_g ?

k= .
h

A second approximation x?) to Xp) may be found by first computing

yg!) = t[(]

by direct interpolation, If a polynomial interpolation tape for use in direct interpolation is not
available, difference interpolation may be used here. Then

(2)_ ,(t) _y
*9 = %o +k[y, (0) .

Successively better approximations to Xq may be found by the repeated application of the last
two equations,

1, In the following example, the tape for direct interpolation is on interpolator III, Switch P
contains 1/h and y, is inctr, A. Ctr.C contains X_, and ctr, D contains Xo: Ctrs, B,
E, F andG are available for computation of Xo 2),

OUT IN MISC.
reset ctr, E E E 7
x 1 to ctr. E Cc E 7
“Xy to ctr. E; E =kh D E 132

Continued on next page
228

CODING
i, (continued) OUT IN MISC,
kh to MC E 761 7
-payxll

x_, toB; B = x(1) Cc E 7
reset ctr. F F F
1/h to MP Pp 7
reset ctr. B B B 7
reset ctr. G G G 7
Yo to ctr.G A G
kh/h toctr. F; F=k F 7
read xf) to interpolator NI and compute vg) =f [z§”] E 76542

62

841
E 763

ctr. B= yf) B 3

7
k to MC F 761 vi
_ yl) -Gey.-y) |

Vy to ctr. G; G = Vo Yq B G (7)32
yl) to Mp
Yo Vo toM G (7)
_ yl) -B = x (2)

tly, Yo to ctr. E; E = Xo E q

(3) The tabular interval h of the function must be examined in order to determine the rapidity of
convergence before using this iterative process,
(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

229

CARD FEEDS

Before a problem involving card feeding is started, the feeds must be coupled to the machine,
They should be uncoupled when the problem does not involve card feeding.

Cards are fed under an automatic control which will light a red light and stop the machine if the
cards run out, or if a card jam occurs, In order to use the card feed automatic safety control,
the switch on the card feed control panel must be thrown to the On position, When cards run
out, this switch must be thrown to the Off position in order to restart the machine.

Card feeds may only be used to read into counters, not into functional units,

The read-out of a number from a card feed may not be inverted, Negative numbers should be
punched as complements on nine.

By plugging, numbers may be shifted to the right or left, If numbers are shifted to the left,
negative numbers should either be punched as complements on 10 or sufficient nines should be
plugged to the right. If numbers are shifted to the right, negative numbers require sufficient
nines plugged to the left, Plugging from any of the eighty card columns into any buss column is
possible, See Plugging Instructions.

The card feeds may not be used in interposed operations during multiplication or division.

If a control tape is coded to use card feed I, card feed II may be used by throwing the card feed
reverse switch, A similar comment holds for card feed Il. The plugging is not carried over
by the switch,

It is frequently necessary to check decks of cards to see that a certain group is used in a cer-
tain run, to see that cards are in their proper order and that cards from the two feeds are
properly paired or grouped, Serial numbers are used to denote the order of groups of cards,
Classification numbers usually follow serial numbers and denote the order of cards within the
group. If classification and serial numbers are punched in the cards, the classification numbers
may be checked through the automatic check counter, The serial numbers may be checked
against a value tape, an accumulation counter or another deck of cards.

All decks of cards should be clearly labeled with the run in which they are to be used, the feed’
in which they are to be placed and necessary information about their classification and serial
numbers,

OUT IN MISC.
1. Read out of card feed I into ctr. A. A 1632
2, Read out of card feed II into ctr. A. A 76321
3. Read out of card feed I into print ctr. I and print. 1432 632
752 7
4. Read out of card feed II into punch ctr, and punch, 753 6321
75

230

CODING

OUT IN MISC.

~~
a

ew
LS)
a
Lac]
bh

5. Read successive cards out of card feed I into print ctr. I

and print. ;
152 6
7432 |632
752 6

(10) If necessary, the blank Out column of the card feed coding may be used to select a value tape
from which the value is read on the next line, or to turn on or off typewriters,

OUT IN MISC.

6. Read out of card feed I into ctr. A. Select the value tape 85 A 7632
on interpolator I and read the value to ctr. B and step the
tape. B 753

7. Read out of card feed [ into ctr. A. Turn on typewriter II. 871 A 7632

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)
(7)

(8)

(9)

231

CARD PUNCH

Before a problem involving punching is started, the punch cable connection must be closed.
This connection should be open when the problem does not involve punching to allow for manual
punching,

Cards are fed into the punch under an automatic control such that lack of a card in punching.
position will automatically stop the machine. This control operates with the codes 753 in the

In column and 51 in the Miscellaneous column, stopping the machine on the line following these

codes, If a card jam occurs, the direct current should be turned off and a card placed in punch-

ing position. The machine may then be started and the computation continued, Since this control

may stop the machine, the codes 753 in the In column and 51 in the Miscellaneous column must

not be interposed in multiplication or division.

Numbers may be shifted to the right or left by suitable plugging, See Plugging Instructions,
Negative numbers are punched as complements on nine,

Since the punch counter has a complete set of carry controls, including end around carry,
quantities may be accumulated init, It may be read into as into any storage counter except
that its read-in code is automatic, must not be followed by a 7 in the Miscellaneous column and
may be interposed in multiplication or division only when the coding is specially arranged.

If a half pick-up is desired on values punched in cards, see Multiple In-Out Counter,

Two punching operations are available, In the first, the punching operation is completed before
the machine starts the next operation, and in the second, the machine starts the next operation
as soon as punching is initiated.

Ten cycles for punching must intervene between the start of one punching operation and the in-
itiation of another. Hence if it is necessary to perform a succession of punching operations,
the "punch and complete punching" code must be used. ;

In the operating instructions of any problem it should be stated how cards punched are to be
labeled and stored.

OUT IN MISC.

1, Read the quantity in sw. or ctr. A into punch ctr. If no card A 153
is in punching position the machine will stop on the next
line of coding.

2, Read minus the quantity in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A into A 753 32
the punch ctr.

3. Read minus IVS to the punch ctr. 8431 153 21
4. Punch out the number lying in the punch ctr, Start next 5
operation before punching is completed.
or 75
5. Punch out the number lying in the punch ctr. and complete 51

punching before starting next operation,
232

(10)

(11)

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
6, Reset the punch ctr. 843
7, Read out of the punch ctr. 863
8. Punch out the quantity lying in sw. or ctr. A. A 753
75
9. Accumulate the quantities lying in sws. or ctrs. A, B, Cc A 753
and D and punch out the sum,
B 753
Cc 153
D 753
15
10. Punch successively the quantities lying in sws. or cirs. A 53
A and B.
51
B 753
75

The biank Out and In column of the line of coding initiating punching may be used to code any
operation not requiring an operational code in the Miscellaneous column, The code which in-
itiates punching may not be combined with the invert code or any other operational code in
the Miscellaneous column. That is, the 5 or 75 in the Miscellaneous column initiating punching

may be inserted in any Miscellaneous column not already containing an operationai code otier
than 7.

The blank Miscellaneous column of the line of coding reading into the punch counter (if not
used for an invert or other such operational code), may be used to code the stepping of a tape
on an interpolator.

OUT IN MISC, |

11, Print and punch the quantity in sw. or ctr. A. Type- A 153
writer I.

A 7432

752 vi)

233

CARD PUNCH
OUT IN MISC.
12, Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B. Deliver the A 761 5
product to ctr. C. Punch out the quantity standing in
the punch ctr. Turn off typewriter I. B
8732 Cc 7
or A 761
B 5
8732 Cc 7
or A 761
B
8732 Cc 75
13, Multiply minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A. by the ab- A 761 32
solute value of ctr. B. Deliver the product to ctr. C
and punch out the quantity in the punch ctr. Turn on B 2
typewriter I.
872 Cc 75
14, Multiply minus sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A. by sw. or A 761 32
ctr. B. Deliver the product to ctr. C, punch out the
quantity in the punch ctr. and step and read the value B 5
from the tape on interpolator I to ctr. D, Turn on :
typewriter II. 85 Cc 753
871 D 7
15, Punch the quantity in sw. or ctr. A, print it with half A 153 531
pick-up on typewriter I, multiply minus sw. (except
IVS) or ctr. B by ctr. A, deliver the product to ctr. C, B 761 32
step the value tape on interpolator II three times, and
read the value to ctr. D. A 7432 531
76543 1531
752, 5
851 Cc 7
D 7

(12) In order to check the values punched in cards, summations of the quantities punched may be
employed, Suppose £(x,,) is computed and punched, the quantities f(x,) are accumulated in the
234

CODING

machine and the summations printed out.

The difference

k-1

* i(x;) = fx,)

x
f(x.) -
( )

is computed and subjected to a check procedure,

The cards are later summed on a tabulator or fed to the machine and summed. If the inde-
pendent summations are compared, this process insures that f(x,) has been correctly punched.
Note that if the check is made directly on f(x,) as computed, the cards are not checked since
the read-outs to the accumulation and punch counter could be incorrect.

Cards may be punched containing a function in the first n card columns and a code number in
the last columns of the card, After the first n columns are punched, a duplicating card and
skip bar control the punch, The punch counter resets and the code number is added into the
punch counter, The code number is then punched in the columns fixed by the skip bar.

16. Punch the 24 columns of the function f(x) standing in ctr. A in card columns 1-24, Punch
the code number accumulated in ctr, E from ctrs, B, C and D in card columns 70, 73, 74,
75, 76 and 79, The duplicating card contains an R in column 25. The punch is plugged as
shown below,

PUNCH MAGNETS

5 10 15 20
~ Spe SS Fé 5-3-5 3 SOO CD aN
25 30 35 40

a ar 00080 009090 00900 oa oO GO
/ 45 50 55 60

Oo Of0/O |0 000 o0a00 0000 oO Of 0 90

\ “Xv
65 \, IK, "5 NN 80
o ojolo|oooo eo oe ldap o
a J

COMP MAG OR CTRITOT EXIT OR| MS|IN

\2A }2B | 4A 4B 8A | | 6B
@ cele e c-e-e—e-o-0-0\_0-0-9-0 0 6 os

NgB
o>» 0000 0000 0000 0000

OUT IN MISC.
reset ctr. E E E vi
accumulate the code number in ctr. E B E 7
E 7

Continued on next page
CARD PUNCH

16. (continued)

f(x) to punch ctr.
punch out f(x)
code number to punch ctr.

punch out code number

235

OUT IN MISC,
E 7
7153
51
E 753
51

236

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

PRINTING

The decimal point, vertical spacing, horizontal spacing, half pick-up and argument control all
require plugging. See Plugging Instructions.

The typewriters should be turned on at least two cycles before they are required to print. The
typewriters may be turned off as soon as printing operations are. completed; i.e., 20 to 23
cycles after the initiation of the last print or immediately after a "print and complete printing"
code,

There are three parts of the printing operation, the read-in to the print counters, the half pick-
up which may be used or not as desired and the initiation of the printing operation.

Negative numbers may be printed as such or as complements on nine if the print complement
switch is thrown.

Since the print counters have complete sets of carry controls including end around carry cir-
cuits, quantities maybe accumulated in them, They maybe read inte as into any storage counter
except their read-in codes are automatic and must not be followed by a 7 in the Miscellaneous
column,

Two printing operations are available, In the first, the printing operation is completed before
the machine starts the next operation, and in the second, the machine starts the next operation
as soon as printing is initiated.

The operation "print and complete printing" must not be interposed in multiplication or division.

Approximately 23 cycies for printing must intervene between the start of one printing operation
and the beginning of another. Hence if it is necessary to perform a succession of printing
operations, the "print and complete printing" code must be used, See Timing,

The half pick-up may be used if a number is to be rounded off to fewer digits than the machine
capacity. Its effect is to add one in the lowest order column retained if the next lower column
contains five or more, Actually the half nick-un adds or subtracts five in the column to which
it is plugged, in the print counter for which it is coded, according as the number in the print
counter is positive or negative, A half pick-up may also be added in from a switch under con-
trol of counter 70, See Choice Counter,

If a control tape is coded to use print counter I and typewriter I, print counter I and typewriter
II may be used by throwing one of the typewriter reverse switches, A similar comment holds
for typewriter TI. Note that this does not change over the half pick-up which is not reversed
and continues to add into the print counter for which it is coded.

Numbers from print counterI may only be printed on typewriterI, Numbers from print counter
II may only be printed on typewriter II.

There is available a special control on printing, the "argument control", which will cause the ,
typewriter not to print zeros to the right of the point to which it is plugged. This code, an 87
in the Out column, is placed on the line of coding initiating printing.

OUT IN MISC.

i. Turn on typewriter II, 871

2. Turn on typewriter I. 872

10,

ll,

12,

13,

14,

15.

PRINTING

Turn off typewriter II.
Turn off typewriter I.
Read the quantity in sw. or ctr, A to print ctr. 1.

Read minus the quantity in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A
to print ctr. I.

Read minus the quantity in IVS to print ctr. I.
Read the quantity in sw. or ctr. A to print ctr. II.

Read minus the quantity in sw, (except IVS) or ctr. A
to print ctr, II.

Reset print ctr.I, Cannot be used while either typewriter
is printing.

Reset print ctr. II. Cannot be used while either typewriter
is printing.

Read out of print ctr. I.
Read out of print ctr. II.
Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw, or ctr. B and deliver the

product to print cir. I.

Print the quantity in print ctr. I on typewriter I and com-
plete printing before starting other operations.

237

OUT IN MISC,
8731
8732
A 7432
A 7432 32
8431 7432 21
A 74321
A 74321 132
842
8421
862
8621
A 761
B
7432
752 6

238

16.

17.

18.

19.

20,

21,

22.

23,

24,

25.

26,

CODING
Print the quantity in print ctr. II on typewriter II and com-
plete printing before starting other operations,

Print the quantity in print ctr. I on typewriter I and
start other operations.

Print the quantity in print ctr. If on typewriter II and
start other operations.

Read the quantity in sw. or ctr. A to print ctr. I and

print on typewriter I.

Read minus the quantity in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A
to print ctr. II and print on typewriter II,

Print the quantity in print ctr. 1 on typewriter I omit-
ting zeros to the right.

Print the quantity in print ctr. II on typewriter II
omitting zeros to the right.

Add half pick-up to print ctr. 1.
Add half pick-up to print ctr. II.
Print the quantity in sw. or ctr. A with half pick-un

on typewriter I,

Print minus the quantity in sw. (except IVS) or ctr. A
with half pick-up on typewriter IT,

OUT IN MISC.
7521 6
752 7
7921 7
A 7432
752 7
A 74321 =| 32
7521 7
87 752 7
87 7521 7
76543
765431
A 7432
76543
752 7
A 74321 132
765431
7521 7

(13)

(14)

PRINTING

27. Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr, B. Deliver the
product to print ctr.I and print.

28. Step and read the value from the tape on interpolator I
to print ctr. I and print.

29. Print successively the quantities lying in sws. or ctrs. A
and B on typewriter I, .

30, Print the quantity lying in sw. or ctr. A on typewriter I
and the quantity in sw. or ctr. B on typewriter IT.

31, Multiply sw. or ctr. A by sw. or ctr. B. Deliver the
product to ctr, C and print B on typewriter I with
half pick-up,

239

OUT IN MISC.

A 761
B

7432

752 7
85 753

7432

752 7
A 7432

752 6
B 7432

752 7
A 7432

752 6
B 74321

7521 7
A 761
B 7432

76543

752

c 7

The blank Miscellaneous column of the lines of coding reading into the print counter (if not
used for an invert or other such operational code), reading in the half pick-up, or initiating

printing, may be used for punching or stepping an interpolator,

The blank In column of the lines of coding reading in the half pick-
be used to select a value tape from which the value is read on the next line,

up or initiatin

g@ printing may
240

CODING
OUT IN MISC.
32, Print the quantity in sw. or ctr. A with half pick-up. Step A 7432 542
the tape on interpolator III back three times and read the
value to ctr. B. 76543 | 542
852 52 7542
B 7
33. Multiply minus ctr. A by the value from the tape on in- A 761 732
terpolator II after stepping ahead once, deliver the
product to ctr. C, print the quantity in sw. or ctr. B with B 7432 5
half pick-up, and punch out the quantity in the punch ctr.
851 76543 | 531
152
Cc 7
34. Punch and print with half pick-up the absolute value of A 753 2
the quantity in ctr. A on typewriter I, multiply it by minus
sw. or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr. C. A 761 72
A 7432 2
76543 15
B 752 32
Cc 7

(15) Printed data may be checked by printing quantities on both typewriters or by simultaneously
printing and punching and later checking the punched cards against the printed results.

(16) Quantities or groups of quantities may be printed simultaneously on both typewriters, This
requires special wiring in the machine and that the typewriters be plugged identically, except
for the read-out control, It is necessary to read into both print counters, but only one code to
initiate printing need be used, since the wiring "gangs" the codes 752 and 7521.

(17) As an added precaution for greater accuracy of the typewriters, half-time printing may be used.
For half-time printing oniy every oiher coiumi selection plughub is plugged te a digit from the
print counter read-out. The intervening plughubs are left blank or may be filled by the argu-
ment control, the decimal point or spaces if desired, This may be of particular advantage when
printing on both typewriters at the same time, if the column selection plughubs of the two type-
writers are plugged alternately and provided that the number of digits in each printed quantity
is small enough. See Plugging Instructions.

(18) Whenthereare manyprints ina computation, so that it is desired to print as rapidly as possible,
the code 76 in the Miscellaneous column may be used instead of the usual 7 or 6 with 752 or
7521, This will allow other operations to be interposed during the printing time, but does not
permit a print to be initiated until the previous print is compieted, As in other interposed cper-
ations, the automatic (7 in the Miscellaneous column) must be omitted from the last interposed
line. :
(1)

(2)

(3)

241

INTERPOSITION OF MACHINE STOPS

It is possible under specialized codings for the machine to choose the time at which certain
operations will be performed, This possibility of a choice is inherent in the nature of the auto-
matic codes controlling the functional units, In particular, the choice of the time at which the
product is read out makes it possible to interpose in multiplication and division certain codes
which may stop the machine,

The check procedure and the read-in to the punch counter may be interposed in multiplication
or division only when the coding is specially arranged. This special coding prevents the loss
of the multiplication or division if the check fails or if there is no card in punching position.
The saving of time is but two cycles, but if checking and punching are frequent operations in a
tape, the time saved may become proportionately large per revolution, The coding must be
used with extreme caution.

It is necessary to code the read-in to the punch counter or the check procedure immediately
before the read-out of the product and to duplicate the product read-out, The first coding of
the product-out must not have a 7 code in the Miscellaneous column, If the procedure fails,
the machine stops on the first product-out, The automatic from the completed multiplication
will cause the sequence mechanism to read the first product-out line, The product will be de-
livered to the designated storage counter, The sequence mechanism will step to the next line
of coding and stop, since there was no Miscellaneous 7 on the product-out line, It should be
noted that if there were a Miscellaneous 7 on the product-out line, the machine would continue
operation as if the check had not failed, If the check or punch read-in does not fail, the auto-
matic from the procedure will cause the sequence mechanism to read the first product-out as
if it were the last line of interposed coding and Step to the next line. No transfer will take place
since there is no code in the Out column, The automatic from the completed multiplication will
cause the sequence mechanism to read the second product-out line which has a 7 in the Miscel-
laneous column, the product will be delivered to the designated storage counter and the machine
will continue operation. ;

OUT IN MISC.
1. Multiply the quantity in sw. or ctr. A by the quantity in A 761 7
sw. or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose
a read-in from ctr. D to the punch ctr, Lines reading 7
(blank, blank, 7) or (blank, blank, blank) may be used for
interposed operations.
B 7
vf
vi
D 753
Cc
c 7
2, Multiply the quantity in sw. or ctr. A by the quantity in A 761 7

sw. or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose
Continued on next page
242

(4)

CODING
2. (continued) OUT IN MISC.
a check of the quantity in ctr. D against the tolerance in 7
sw. W during the multiplication. Lines reading (blank,
blank, 7) or (blank, blank, 64) may be used for interposed 74 74
operations.
B vi
SW 74 7
D 74 71
64
Cc
Cc 7
3. Multiply the quantity in sw. or ctr. A by the quantity in A 761 7
sw. or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr. C. Interpose
a "ganged" print from ctrs, B and E and a check of the 74 74 7
quantity in ctr. D against the tolerance in sw. W during
the multiplication. sw 14
B 74321
E 7432
D 14 val
752 64
c
c 7

If both the read-in to the punch counter and the check procedure are to be interposed, there must
be at least two non-gere digits in either the odd or the even columns of the multiplier, The

product-out line of coding must appear three times, First, immediately after the check pro-
cedure, it appears with a 7in the Misceiianeous coiumu, secondly, immediately after the read-in
to the punch counter, it appears without a 7 in the Miscellaneous column; thirdly, in the following

line, it appears with a 7 in the Miscellaneous column,

If the check procedure fails, the machine will stop on the first product-out line. The automatic
from the completed multiplication will signal the sequence mechanism to read this first product-
out line and step to the next, The product will be delivered to the designated storage counter.
The 7 in the Miscellaneous column will order the sequence mechanism to read the next line of
coding and step to the next, There will be a read-in to the punch counter, The automatic from
the punch counter read-in will order the sequence mechanism to read the next line, This line
(blank, C,. blank) will effect no transfer and the sequence coniroi will remain on the last line of
coding,
(5)

243

INTERPOSITION OF MACHINE STOPS

If there is no card in punching position, the machine will stop on the second product-out line,
The automatic from the completed multiplication will signal the sequence mechanism to read
the second product-out line and step. The product will be delivered to the designated storage
counter and the machine will remain on the last line of coding,

If the check fails and there is no card in punching position, the machine will stop on the first
product-out line, The automatic from the completed multiplication will signal the sequence
mechanism to read the first product-out line and step. The product will be delivered to the
designated storage counter, The 7 in the Miscellaneous column will order the sequence mecha-
nism to read the next line of coding and step, Since there is no card in punching position, the
sequence mechanism will remain on the second product-out line,

If neither the punch counter read-in nor the check procedure fails, the automatic from the
check will cause the sequence mechanism to read the first product-out line as if it were merely
a line of interposed coding. No transfer will take place, since there is no code in the Out
column, The 7 in the Miscellaneous column will order the sequence mechanism to read the
next line of coding and step, There will be a read-in to the punchcounter, The sequence mecha-
nism will read the second product-out as if it were the last line of interposed coding. No
transfer will take place since there is no code in the Out column, The automatic from the
completed multiplication will cause the machine to read the third product-out line, The product
will be delivered to the designated storage counter, The machine will continue operation.

Similar codings may be applied to division, There will of course be more interposed lines
during the division, and the check or punch procedure will immediately precede the read-out of
the quotient,

OUT IN MISC.
4, Multiply the quantity in sw. or ctr. A by the quantity in A 761 7
sw, or ctr. B and deliver the product to ctr. C, Interpose
a check of the quantity in ctr. E against the tolerance in 74 74 7
sw. W and a read-in from ctr. D to the punch ctr. Line
reading (blank, blank, 64) may be used for an interposed SW 74
operation,
B 7
E 74 71
64
Cc 7
D 753
Cc
Cc 75
5. Divide the quantity in ctr. A by the quantity in ctr. B B 761 7
and deliver the quotient to ctr, C. Division must be
plugged to at least ten digits, Interpose a check of 74 74 7

the quantity in ctr. E against the tolerance in sw. W
Continued on next page
244

CODING

{continued}

and a read-in from ctr. D to the punch ctr. Lines reading
(blank, blank, 7) and (blank, blank, 64) may be used for
interposed operations.

OUT IN MISC.
SW 74
A 7
7
7
7
7
7
7
E 74 TW
64
Cc 7
D 753
Cc
Cc 75

245

CHAPTER V
PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS
"One deviates to the right, another to the left; the error is the same with all, but it
deceives them in different ways." Horace.

Once the tapes necessary to the solution of a problem have been prepared, the appropriate
Switches set and the plugging completed, the calculator may be started. The machine will then con-
tinue in operation, hour after hour, completely checking its own results until either the problem has
been solved or until a breakdown occurs. Experience has shown that the calculator will operate
approximately ninety percent of the time without failure of any kind, and on occasion has run as long
as four weeks without interruption. At such times it is necessary for the operator only to exercise
minor supervision such as checking the bearing temperatures, keeping the typewriters supplied with
paper and the feeds with cards. However, the accuracy of all computed results is dependent not only
upon the accurate operation of the calculator itself but also upon the accuracy with which the manual
adjustments were made prior to starting the problem. Herein lies the only opportunity for error
which is not automatically checked bythe machine itself. The calculator is far more nearly infallible
than the personnel in charge of its operation. The setting of the switches and the plugging of the
functional units provide the twopossible sources of humanerror. It cannot be too strongly emphasized
that these two operations must be carried out with the greatest of care and thoroughly checked before
a problem is started. For example, if two neighboring wires in the typewriter plugging are inter-
changed, twodigits in the printed results will be interchanged. The entire computation will have been
automatically checked by the calculator, but the results will be incorrectly printed. If two card feed
plugwires are interchanged, the calculator will compute on incorrect input data, check its computation
and the error will not be detected. It is essential therefore that the plugging be checked by reading
in known values, such as diagonal numbers, and printing them out before a computation is begun.

The plugging of a particular unit, though tedious, is not difficult once the underlying principles
and the labeling of the plugboards are understood. In order to simplify the plugging diagrams, a

wiring convention will be employed. Whenever n successive plughubs in any one row of the plug-
246
PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

board are to be plugged in one to one correspondence with n other plughubs in another row, the n

plugwires will be represented by a single connection as shown in the following diagram,
000 00 000 © 00
Actual wiring Convention

For convenient reference the plugging instructions have been divided into sections correspond-

ing to the various units of the machine and to the sections of the chapter on coding.

Section Page Section Page
Multiplication 247 Sine Unit 258
Division 249 Interpolators 262
Logarithm In-Out Counter 251 Card Feeds 272
Sine In-Out Counter 252 Card Punch 274
Logarithm Unit 254 Printing 275
Exponential Unit 256 Sample Plugging 281

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

247

MULTIPLICATION
The multiply unit requires plugging for the read-out of the PQ counter into the buss.

If the operating decimal point of the machine lies between columns n and n + 1, the decimal
point of the PQ counter lies between columns 2n and 2n+1. From the PQ counter, 23 columns
and the algebraic sign are read into the buss (P-OUT plughubs). The P-OUT plughubs are so
plugged that the decimal point of the quantity standing in the PQ counter is shifted to conform
with the operating decimal point; i.e., ;

an + 1st plughub of PQ to n + 1st plughub of P-OUT,
2nth plughub of PQ to nth plughub of P-OUT,
sign plughub of PQ to 24th plughub of P-OUT.

The plugging is continued to the right and left until the P-OUT plughubs are filled.

The PQ counter plughubs lie in rows 2 and 3 of the MP-DIV plugboard. The P-OUT plughubs |
lie in the 4th row of the same board. The sign plughub of the PQ counter is the 24th plughub in
the 3rd row.

1, Plug the multiply unit for operating with the decimal point between columns 15 and 16.

Row 2 @-e-e—-e-0#-0-#-#8 00000 00000 o0000 PQ CTR

25 20 15 10 5
: qsign
Row 3 o 000 090000 0 0 @-@-e—2#-e—-0—9—-e—e-0o-e-8 | PQ CTR
46 45 40 35 30
Row 4 o o-oo 0-0-0 6-0 0-0 0 0-0 re ra P-OUT

24 20 15 10 5

The omission of plugging to some of the low-order P-OUT plughubs increases the speed of com-
putation at the expense of accuracy, since fewer non-zero digits are carried to the next step in
the computation.

2. The operating decimal point lies between columns 19 and 20. Plug the multiply unit to read
no more than twelve decimal places from the PQ counter,

Row 2 00000 00000 00000 oo0000 90000 PQCTR.

25 20 15 10 5
~~ Sign
Row 3 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 &-0—0—0—t—0 00-96 999-999 0 PQCTR.
46 45 40 35 30
Row 4 o o-0-0 0-0-0 oo bos 00 002 00 00000 P-OUT
24 20 15 10 5

For high accuracy computation, the operating decimal point is assumed to lie between columns
23 and 24.
* 248

(6)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

3. Plug the multiply unit for high accuracy computation.

Row 2 000 00000 00000 00000 00000 PQCTR.
25 20 15 10 5

Row 3 o 0 0 @—e-o-0—0—9__9_0_0_9_¢_9_ 000-900-909 | PQ CTR.
46 45 40 35 30

Row 4 0o oe + 2-20-02 ete e ose e 09-8 P-OUT
24 20 15 10 5

Table 1 shows the necessary plugging for the read-out from the PQ counter to the buss (P-OUT
plughubs) for each position of the operating decimal point. The number at the top of each column
refers to the P-OUT plughub. The numbers in the body of the table refer to the PQ counter plug-~
hubs. Note that the sign plughub of the PQ counter is connected to the 24th P-OUT plughub.

TABLE 1 MULTIPLICATION: PQ COUNTER TO P-OUT
P-OUT COLUMNS

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1)
1/0 |S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
2/1 {S 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 8 2
3/2 |S 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
4/3 |S 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4
5A |S 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5
6/5 |S 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
6 7/6 iS 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 i9 18 17 16 15 i4 13 12 1110 9 8 7
S 8/7 |S 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
6 9/8 |S 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
&i0/5 iS 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 26 i9 18 i7 16 15 14 13 i2 ii id
ge 11/10}/S 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
& IZ/l1L'S 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12
@ 18/12;S 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13
A 14/13|S 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
g 15/14 S 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
8 16/15/S 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
& i7/i6|S 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 3i 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
& 18/17 S 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18
19/18/S 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19
20/191S 42 41 40 39 28 27 36 35 24 33 32 31 20 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20
21/20)S 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21
22/2i|S 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22
23/22;S 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23
24/2318 46 45 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24

(1)

(2)

249
DIVISION

Division requires:

A. plugging for the number of comparisons to be made during the dividing operation,
B. a switch setting to control the amount of shift to the right of the read-out of the quotient
from the PQ counter to the buss. ;

The number of comparisons through which the dividing operation is carried is determined by
the Miscellaneous codes controlling the place limitation plugging. The number of comparisons
in a dividing operation may vary from 1 to 24. Five orders of accuracy may be selected in this
range by non-automatic operational codes in the Miscellaneous column. The codes are associ-
ated with the 25th plughubs of rows 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the MP-DIV plugboard.

Code 25th plughub in row

643 6 minimum accuracy
6431 5
6432 4
64321 3
blank 1 maximum accuracy

The number of comparisons is controlled by the plughubs of the first row of the MP-DIV plug-
board. The number of comparisons includes a first no go if such occurs. This implies that if
d significant digits are desired in the PQ counter, the dividing operation must be plugged for
d +1 comparisons. At most, 23 columns are read out of the PQ counter unless the low order
read-out is used,

1. Plug the place limitations of division to provide 4, 9 and 15 significant digits in the PQ
counter, using codes 643, 6431 and blank respectively.

code blank

Row 1 0000 0000 0c 000 ooo00 0000
| 23 20 15 fo /

Row 2 00000 oo0000 C900 CO0l/0000 0 fo0000
Ky Code 64321

Row 3 ‘00000 o0o0000 9000000 000 Jooo0od0o
y Code 6432

Row 4 ‘0 0000 oo0o000 909 0007/0000 0j]000 0 0
wcode 6431

Row 5 70000 90970090 DO0000f/0 000 0]o000 00
code 643

Row 6 “¢ 0000 99000 00000 Da20000]000 00

2. Plug the place limitation of division to provide 18 significant digits in the PQ counter, using
the blank code.

code blank
Row 1 9000 0o 9°90 00000 G0000 oooodod
i 23 20] 15 10 5

250

(3)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

3. Plug the piace limitation of division to provide 23 significant digits in the PQ counter, using
the biank code.

code blank
Row 1 000 00000 00000 00000 00000
|] 2s 20 15 10 5

The amount of shift to the right of the read-out of the quotient from the PQ counter to the buss
is controlled by a pair of manually set switches. These two dial switches, located to the right
of the sequence mechanism, are labeled "Divide N minus decimal". The switches must be set
to the value 22 - n, where the operating decimal point lies between columns n and n+1. For
high accuracy computation, the switches must be set to 00.
(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

251

LOGARITHM IN-OUT COUNTER

The LIO counter has a pluggable read-out from the counter into the buss.

The LIO-OUT plughubs lie in row 26 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 25 of the
functional plugboard. The auxiliary nines, necessary in plugging for negative numbers, lie in
the ten plughubs of the right side of the bottom row of the board.

The LIO counter may be used to shift quantities to the right or left; i.e., to multiply by a power
of ten.

1. Plug the LIO counter to shift quantities 5 columns to the left; i.e., to multiply by 10°,

Row 25 o e—e—0__0—_0_0—_0-—_0-_,_0 0-0 _0-—_0-—_0-_0-_0-—_0-—0 ihr ide BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
Row 26 o 000 00 oo -+ 0-0 -c lec cc ooo 0-0-0 LIO-OUT
24 20 15 10 5
Bottom Row oo000 ae aay 9's
10 5

2. Plug the LIO counter to shift quantities 8 columns to the right; i.e., to multiply by 1078.

Row 25 0 9 e-e-e—elesee oe _0--0_0_0-0_-p-—-0_0_ 0-00-00 | BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
Row 26 o oo 0-0-0 0-60 0 0 0 -0-0-0 00 0 0000 0} LIO-OUT
24 20 15 10 5
Bottom Row 00 o-e-o—_ele-e-o-0 9's
10 5

The LIO counter may be used to drop off digits from any quantity.

3. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug the LIO counter to read
‘out only the decimal part of a quantity.

Row 25 o o-o-o—eleo—e—e | e—o—_o—0_0 __0_0_9-_0_0—__0_0_0-0—0 BUSS

24 20 15 10 5
Row 26 o 000 0000 0 | eeee—o—e-o—0—e-0o—ee-0-0—-e LIO-OUT
24 20 15 10 5
Bottom Row o—e-e_ele—ee-e oo Os
10 5

4. The first five columns of a quantity constitute a serial number. Plug the LIO counter to
drop off the serial number.

Row 25 0 @—e—-e—e—e—0—0—e—0__0_0_0_0-_0-_0_0-_0-_0-9 BUSS
24 20 15 ' 10
Row 26 0 e—e-e—e—e—e—e—-0—o—_0—_0—_0—_ 00 —__0—-0 0-0-8 “0 0000 LIO-OUT

24 20 15 5

Bottom Row 00000 Ys

10 5
252

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(8)

(7)

SINE IN-OUT COUNTER

The SIO counter has a pluggable read-in, SIO-IN Il, and two pluggable read-outs, SIO-OUT I
ara AAT Tr omit NAF 4¢ wert

and SIO-OUT Ii. The "85-1 PU" switch must be in the off position when the SIO counter is used
for any operation not a part of the sine computation.

The SIO-IN II plughubs lie in row 32 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 33 of the
functional plugboard. This read-in is associated with the automatic code 8741 in the In column.

The SIO-OUT I plughubs lie in row 35 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 34 of the
functional plugboard, This read-out is associated with the code 874 in the Out column,

If negative quantities are to be routed via SIO-IN II and SIO-IN I, auxiliary nines must be sup-
plied from a switch under control of the choice counter.

The SIO-OUT II plughubs lie in row 36 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 37 of the
functional plugboard. The auxiliary nines, necessary in plugging for negative numbers, lie in
the ten plughubs of the left side of the bottom row of the board. This read-out is associated
with the code 84 in the Out column.

If the "SIO-OUT~2 Invert Control" switch is in the on position, a nine in the 24th column will
pick up the plugged auxiliary nines and will invert the read-out of the plugged columns of SIO.
if the switch is in the off position, a nine in the 24th column will pick up the plugged auxiliary
nines but the read-out of the plugged columns of SIO will be direct.

The SIO counter may be used to shift quantities to the right or left; i.e., to multiply by a power
of ten.

1. Plug SIO-IN II to shift positive quantities 2 columns to the left; i.e., to multiply by 100.

Row 32 ae o—_0—-o-_0-—_0—_0—_0—_9-_0-—0_0._, 0 _0-_0_0_ 60-00-00 0 0 SIO-IN II
24

20 15 10 5
Row 33 os 0 0 o—o-0-0-0-0 0-00-00 1 0 6-0-0 2 -0-0-9-8 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

2. Plug SIO-OUT I to shift positive quantities 3 columns to the right; i.e.,to multiply by 10-3,

Row 34 os 00 G &e-s-é—-s sss ss ee) BUSS

24 20 15 10 5
Row 35 o oo eee ee cele e s sas se os 9900 S0-OUTI
24 20 15 10 5

3. Plug SIO-OUT II to shift quantities 2 columns to the right; i.e., to multiply by 10-2,

Row 36 o oo 0 _¢ 0-0-0 0-8 _¢-0 0-0-0000 —0-@-9 0 0 SIO-OUTT
24 20 id 10 5

Row 37 o cececesccsel soseecsees BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

Bottom

Row 00 #He0 oO 0 0 Oo

25 20
253
SINE IN-OUT COUNTER

(8) The SIO counter may be used to drop off digits from any quantity.

4. Plug SIO-OUT I to shift the 23rd column of a quantity to the 1st column of the buss. Plug
SIO-OUT II to shift columns 1-22 of a quantity one column to the left. This plugging is
used in high accuracy division.

Row384 00000 000060 00000 00000 oooo0 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5 |

Row 35 00600 00000 00000 00000 00000. 4SIO-OUTI

24 20 15 10 5

Row 36 0 00 . SIO-OUT II
24 20 15 10 5

Row 37 o o o BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

5. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug SIO-OUT I to read the
integral part of a positive quantity to the buss. Plug SIO-OUT II to read the decimal part
of a positive quantity to the buss.

Row 34 0 o ©0000 00000 00000. BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

Row 35 oo 90000 00000 00000. £SIO-OUTI
24 20 - 15 10 5

Row36 coo0000 ocooo0o eet 0 009-000-0000 SIO-OUT II
24 20 15 10 5

Row37 00000 00000 o—e_0_0_0 0-0 _0_0_ 000-98 0-9 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
254

(2)

- (3)

(4)

LOGARITHM UNIT

The logarithm unit requires:
A. plugging to read the logarithm from the LIO counter into the buss,

B. a switch setting used in the determination of the characteristic,
C. plugging to terminate division; see Division.

At the end of the computation, the logarithm stands in the LIO counter with decimal point be-
tween columns 21 and 22. The LIO-OUT must be plugged to read the logarithm into the buss
with decimal point at the operating position.

The LIO-OUT plughubs lie in row 26 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 25 of the
functional plugboard. The auxiliary nines, necessary if the logarithm has a negative charac-
teristic, lie in the ten plughubs of the right side of the bottom row of the board. Since only ten
such auxiliary nines are available, special provisions must be made for computing logarithms
when there are ten or fewer operating decimal places. See Coding, Logarithm Unit.

Table 2 shows the necessary plugging of LIO-OUT for each position of the operating decimal
point. The number at the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers in the
body of the table refer to the LIO-OUT plughubs, except that "9's" refers toany of the ten plug-
hubs at the right side of the bottom row of the functional plugboard.

TABLE 2. LOGARITHMS: LIO-OUT TO BUSS

BUSS COLUMNS
24 238 22 21:20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Operating Decimal Position

1/0 |24 23 22
ay |24 23 22 21
3/2 |24 23 22 21 20
4/3 |24 23 22 21 20 19
5/4 124 23 22 21 20 19 18
6/5 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
7/6 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
8/7 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
9/3 124 ‘ 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14

10/9 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13

11/10 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12

12/11 |24 Os 9 9S 9s 9's OS OS O's OS O's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11

13/12 |24 9's 9 95 Gs 9's OS Os Y's O's 23 22 Zi 20 19 18 17 16 15 id 13 i2 ti 16

1413124 Oe Oe Oe Os Ms OS Os Ob 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9

15/14 [24 95 9s 9's 9s OS OS Os 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
16/15|24 9's 9s 9s 9s OS 9s 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 B 7
17/16 |24 9's 9's 9's 9's Q's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8B 7 6
18/17|24 9's O's 9's 9S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5
19/18/24 9's 9s 95 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4

20/19|24 9's 9s 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

21/20|24 9's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2

22/21 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

23/22/24 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 § 4 8 2 1 23

24/23 This decimal nosition cannot be used.

(5)

255

LOGARITHM UNIT

1, The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16, Plug the LIO-OUT.

Row 25 0 9 e-eeleee o—e—_0-_0_0 00-09-00 9 e009 | BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
i. decimal point
Row 26 o o-0e 0-0-6 0 0 4 0 0-000 0-0-0 © 00000] LIO-OUT
24 21 20 15 10 5
Bottom Row 0000 o—e elec. 9's
10 a)

The determination of the characteristic of the logarithm is controlled by a pair of manually
set switches. These two dial switches, located to the right of the sequence mechanism, are
labeled "log N value". The switches must be set to the value 22 - n, where the operating deci-
mal point lies between columns n and n + 1.
256

(i)

(2)

(3)

(4)

The exponential unit requires:

=

A. plugging to

read x from the buss into the EIO coun
B. plugging to read the exponential function from the EIO counter into the buss,
C. plugging to terminate division; see Division.

EXPONENTIAL UNIT

an inty the FIO counter
Hula,

At the start of the exponential computation, x stands with its decimal point at the operating
position. The EIO-IN must be plugged to read x from the buss into the FIO counter with deci-
mal point between columns 21 and 22.

The EIO-IN plughubs lie ‘in row 27 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 28 of the func-
tional plugboard.

Table 3 shows the necessary plugging of EFIO-IN for each position of the operating decimal
point, The number at the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers in the
body of the table refer to the EIO-IN plughubs.

TABLE 3

EXPONENTIAL: BUSS TO EIO-IN

BUSS COLUMNS

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13.12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 2 1

1/0 | 24 23 22

2/1 | 24 23 22 21

3/2 | 24 23 22 21 20

4/3 | 24 23 22 21 206 19

5/4 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18

6/5 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
§ 7/6 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
3 8/7 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
2 9/8 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
A, i6/9 | 24 3 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 12
11/10) 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12
& 12/11) 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
8 13/12 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
A 14/13) 24 23 22 21 20 19.18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
6 15/14) 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
B 16/15 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
ke 17/16) 24 23 22 21 26 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 & 7 &
2 18/17) 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5
2 19/18 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4

20/19) 24 93 92 91 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 18 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

21 /20| 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2

22/21|24 23 22 21 20 i9 18 i7 16 15 i4 13 12 ii 16 GS 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

23/22/24 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 765 4 3 2 1 --

24/23/24 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 -- --

1, The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug the EIO-IN.

¢ decimal point
Row 27 °8 eee —_0_e_ 0-00-00 0-0 09 -0-9-@ 0 0 0000 EIO-IN
24 21 20 15 10 5
Row 28 ovooe 0 0 0 e-e-0-0 0-0-0 —ele-0-0 9 0-0-0-0-8 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

257
EXPONENTIAL UNIT

(5) At the end of the computation, the exponential function stands with its decimal point between
plughubs 21 and 22, The EIO-OUT must be plugged to read the exponential function into the
buss with decimal point at the operating position.

(6) The EIO-OUT plughubs lie in rows 30 and 31 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 29 of
the functional plugboard.

(7) Table 4 shows the necessary plugging of EIO-OUT for each position of the operating decimal
point. The number at the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers in the
body of the table refer to the EIO-OUT plughubs.

TABLE 4 EXPONENTIAL: EIO-OUT TO BUSS
BUSS COLUMNS

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 18 121110 9 8 765 43 241
1/0 |-- 44 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22
2/1 {-- 43 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21
3/2 |-- 42 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20
4/3 |-- 41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19
5/4 |-- 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18
6/5 |-- 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
§ 7/6 |-- 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
3 8/7 | -- 37 36 35 34 33 32 31.30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
a 9/8 |-- 36 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
A, 10 -- 35 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13
q 11/10] -- 34 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16°15 14 13 12
& 12/11] -- 33 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
9 13/12) -- 32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
A 14/13; -- 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
& 15/14) -- 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
3S 16/15|-- 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7
5 17/16] -- 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
18/17} -- 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5
o 19/18] -- 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 138 12 1110 9 8 765 4
20/19] -- 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4 8
21/20) -- 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 65 4 3 2
22/21)-- 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 121110 9 8 76543 241
23/22) -- 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 18 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 --
24/23)-- 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 2 %4----

2, The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug the EIO-OUT.

Row 29 oo o—ele—e @—0 0-00-0000 —__0_0_9-_ 0 0000-00 | BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
r decimal point
Row 30 0 0000 0] EIO-OUT
25 21 20 15 10 5

Row3l1 00000 00000 00000 00000 o eels EI0-OUT
45 40 35 30
258

(2)

(3)

(4)

SINE UNIT

The sine unit requires plugging to:

read 1/27 from the table relevs into the buss
reac i/ 67 irom the taoie reiays into the ouss,

read x/2n from the buss into the SIO counter,

read the decimal part of x/2n from the SIO counter into the buss,
read sin x from the SIO counter into the buss,

multiply at the operating decimal position; see Multiplication.

BOO?

In the table relays, 1/27 stands with its decimal point between columns 22 and 23. The read-
out of the table relays must be plugged to read 1/27 into the buss with decimal point at the
operating position.

The 1/27 plughubs lie in row 20 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 19 of the MP-DIV
plugboard.

Table 5 shows the necessary plugging of the read-out of 1/27 for each position of the operating
decimai point. The number ai the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers
in the body of the table refer to the 1/27 plughubs.

Operating Decimal Position

TABLE 5 SiNE: i/27 TO BUSS
BUSS COLUMNS

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1/0 This decimal position cannot be used.
2/1 22
3/2 22 21
43 22 21 20
5/4 22 21 20 1
6fA 22 21 20 19 18
1/6 22 21 20 19 18 17
8/7 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
9/8 22 21 20 i9 18 17 16 15
10/9 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
11/10 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13
12/1 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12
13/12 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
14/13 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
15/14 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
16/15 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 138 12 11 10 9 8
17/16 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
18/17 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
19/18 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5
20/19 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4
21/20 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 8
22/21 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 8 2
23 /22 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 83 2 12
24/23 Use this decimal position with caution,

1. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16, Plug the read-out of 1/27.

Row19 o0000 00000 e+ 0 2-0-0 7 0 00 -#-0-0-8 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

;—decimal point ,
Row 20 ooo 00 oo 000 1/27r

24 22 20 15 10 5

(5)

(8)

(7)

(8)

(9)

259

SINE UNIT

In the buss, x/27 stands with its decimal point at the operating position. The SIO-IN Ii must be
plugged to read x/2m into the SIO counter at the same decimal position; i.e., the plugging is
direct.

The SIO-IN II plughubs lie in row 32 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 33 of the
functional plugboard.

2. Plug SIO-IN II.

Row 32. o » SIO-IN TI
24 20 15 10 5 ;

Row 33 o > BUSS
24 20 15 -10 5

In the SIO counter, x/2m7 stands with its decimal point at the operating position, The SIO-OUT I
must be plugged to read x/2m into the buss with its decimal point between columns 22 and 23.

The SIO-OUT I plughubs lie in row 35 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 34 of the
functional plugboard.

Table 6 shows the necessary plugging of SIO-OUT I for each position of the operating decimal
point, The number at the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers in the
body of the table refer to the SIO-OUT I plughubs.

TABLE 6 SINE; SIO-OUTI TO BUSS
~ BUSS COLUMNS
24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 21

1/0 This decimal position cannot be used.
2/1 j-- -- i
3/2 |-- -- 2 1
4/8 |-- -- 3 2 1
5/4 |-- -- 4 3 2 1
6/5 |-- -- 5 4 3 2 1
7/6 |-- -- 6 5 4 3 2 1
8/T |-- -- 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
9/8 j-- -- 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
10/9 j-- -- 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
11/ldj-- -- 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1W2/llj-- -- 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 241
13/12;-- -- 12 11 10 9 8 7 65 4 3 21
14/13|;-- -- 13 12 1110 9 8 765 4 3 2 1
15/l4}-- -- 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
16/15;-- -- 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 21
17/l6|-- -- 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 65 43 241
18/i7}-- -- 17 16 15 14 18 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
19/18;-- -- 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 65 4 8 2 1
20/19}-- -- 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 2421
21/20/-- -- 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 2 (4421
22/21)}-- -- 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 241
23/22|-- -- 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 2421
24/23 Use this decimal position with caution.

260

(10)

(11)

(12)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

3. The operating decimal point lies between ecolumns 15 and 16. Plug SIO-OUT I.

decimal point
f. Pp

Row 34 0 0 0'e—e—e—e—e—ee—_0-9_0—_0_0—_0-#-@ 00 00000. BUSS
24 22 20 15 10 5

Row35 o0000 00000 o-c-c_0_0- 0-0-0 0 0-0 0-0-8 SIO-OUT I
24 20 15 10 5

At the end of the computation, sin x stands in the SIO counter with decimal point between col-
ums 22 and 23. The SIO-OUT II must be plugged to read the sine into the buss with decimal
point at the operating position.

The SIO-OUT II plughubs lie in row 36 and the corresponding buss plughubs in row 37 of the
functional plugboard. The auxiliary nines, necessary if the sine is negative, lie in the ten plug-
hubs of the left side of the bottom row of the same board. Since only ten such auxiliary nines
are available, special provisions must be made for computing the sines of third and fourth
quadrant angles if there are eleven or fewer operating decimal places. See Coding, Sine Unit.

Table 7 shows the necessary plugging of SIO-OUT II for each position of the operating decimal
point. The number at the top of each column refers to the buss plughub. The numbers in the
body of the table refer to the SIO-OUT II plughubs, except that "9's" refers to any of the ten
plughubs at the right side of the bottom row of the functional plugboard.

TABLE 7 SINE: SIO-OUT II TO BUSS

BUSS COLUMNS
24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 43 2 «#1

Operating Decimal Position

1/0 This decimal position cannot be used.

2/1 | 24 23 22
3/2 | 24 23 22 21
4/3 |24 23 22 21 206
5/4 | 24 23 22 21 20 19
6/5 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18
7/6 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
8/7 124 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
9/8 |24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15

1

1

1

13/12/24 9's 9's 9's 95 9's 9's O's O'S 9's O'S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
14/13 {24 9's 9's 9's 9's O's O'S O's O's 9S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
15/14 |24 9's 9's 9's 9's 9's 95 O's O'S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
16/15 }24 9's 9's 9's 9's 9's O'S O'S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
17/16 |24 9's 9's 9's 9's 9's O's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11

18/17|24 9's D's O's O's O'S 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
19/18 |24 9s 9's 9's 9's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10
20/19 |24 9's 9's O's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
21/20 }24 9's 9's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
22/21 |24 9's 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
23/22 124 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 &
24/23 Use this decimal position with caution.

mt DD 09 pR OFT GD ~7 CO

261

SINE UNIT

4, The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug SIO-OUT IL.

Row 36

Row 37

Bottom
Row

r decimal point

oO e—0—-0 00-000 0-9 0-_0-_@—0-@-0 00 00000 SIO-OUTH

24 «22 20

o o—e--0-___0_0—_e—_0
24 20

oe elee—ee 000

15 10 5

BUSS
15 10 5
262

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

INTERPOLATORS

The plugging of each interpolator unit is compiete and independent. In order to plug an inter-
polator unit, the following quantities must be specified:

the interval of the argument or the highest order "h",

the tape decimal point,

the number of arguments in the tape,

the number of interpolational coefficients (including Co) accompanying each argument,
the operating decimal point.

AoOmP

An interpolator unit requires:

plugging to read the argument from the buss into the interpolation counter,

plugging to read "h correction-2" into the intermediate counter,

plugging to read "h correction-3" into the intermediate counter,

plugging to read "h" from the buss into the intermediate counter,

plugging to read the interpolational coefficients from the buss tothe intermediate counter,
a switch setting of one half the number of arguments in the tape,

a switch setting of the number of interpolational coefficients (including Cg) accompany-
ing each argument, ;
plugging to multiply at the operating decimal position; see Multiplication.

m OM OOWP

In order to position a functional tape to the nearest value of the argument, six columns of the
buss must be plugged to the interpolation counter. These six columns include the algebraic
sign column, the four argument columns and the highest order "h" column. In order to position
a functional tape to the next lower value of the argument, only five columns of the buss are
plugged to the interpolation counter. The plugging from the highest order "h" column to the
first column of the interpolation counter is omitted.

The interpolationcounter plughubs and the corresponding buss plughubs lie in the following rows:

Interpolator I - functional plugboard, row 15 INTERPOLATION-IN-1, row 16 BUSS;
Interpolator II - MP-DIV plugboard, row 12 I-IN-1-2, row il BUSS;
Interpolator III - MP-DIV plugboard, row 13 1I-IN-1-3, row14 BUSS.

Table 8 shows the necessary plugging for the read-in of the argument to the interpolation counter
for each highest order "h" column. The number at the top of each column refers to the inter-
polation counter plughub. The numbers in the body of the table refer to the buss plughubs.

1 Mian + i ;
1, The operating decimal point

lies hetween columns 15 and 16. Plug the interpolation count-
er for the following values of Aa and highest order "h".

Interpolator Aa Highest Order "h"
I 0.1 14
I 0.01 13

iti 0.001 12

(8)

INTERPOLATORS

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 15 0

65 4 3

Row 16 o

oO

24

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 11 0-0 (ome)
24

Row12 ov
65 4 3

Rowl14 oWOO0O0

24

20 15 10

2

Row 13 o 000 00000 00000
654. 2

20. 15 - 10

ce)
5

I-IN-1

BUSS

BUSS

I-IN-1-2

I-IN-1-3

BUSS

263

If h is negative, the "h" correction-2 reads auxiliary nines into the columns of the intermediate
counter to the left of the highest order "h" column, If it is desired to read these auxiliary
nines into a storage counter A under control of the line of coding (841, A, blank), the "h" cor-
rection-2 plughubs should be plugged to any available row of buss plughubs instead of to the

intermediate plughubs.

TABLE 8 INTERPOLATION: BUSS TO INTERPOLATION COUNTER

INTERPOLATION COUNTER COLUMNS

6 5 4 3 2 1
1 24 5 4 3 2 1
2 24 6 5 4 3 2
3 24 7 6 5 4 3
4 24 8 7 6 5 4
5 24 9 8 7 é 5
g 6 24 10 9 8 7 6
a7 24 11 10 9 8 7
3 8 24 12 11 10 9 8
SO 9 24 13 «12 11 10 9
= 10 24 14 13 12 11 10
sli 24 15 14 13 12 11
@ 12 24 16 15 14 13 12
& 13 24 17 16 15 14 13
= 14 24 18 17 16 15 14
@ 15 24 19 18 17 16 15
16 24 20 19 18 17 16
17 24 21 20 19 18 17
18 24 22 21 20 19 18
19 24 23 22 21 20 19
20 24 -- 23 22 21 20
21 24 -- -- 23 22 21
22 24 -- -- -- 23 22

264

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

(7) The “h" correction-2 piughubs and the corresponding intermediate counter plughubs lie in the
following rows:

Interpolator I - functional plugboard, row 19 H-CORR-2, row 20 INTERMED-IN-2;
Interpolator Il - MP-DIV plugboard, row 21 H-CORR-2-2, row 22 INT;
Interpolator Ill - MP-DIV plugboard, row 25 H-CORR-3-2, row 26 INT.

(8) Table 9 shows the necessary plugging for reading the "h" correction-2 auxiliary nines to the
intermediate counter for each highest order "h" column. The number at the top of each column
refers to the intermediate plughub. The numbers in the body of the table refer to the "h" cor-
rection plughubs.

TABLE 9 INTERPOLATION: "h" CORRECTION-2 TO INTERMEDIATE CO UNTER
INTERMEDIATE COUNTER COLUMNS
94 22 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 i
1 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 121110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
2 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 121110 9 8 7 6 5 4
3 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4
4 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5
5 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
& 6 94 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
g 7 94 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8
eo 8 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
an) 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 16
= 10 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11
~ il 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12
2 12 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 i7 16 i5 i4 15
8 13 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14
p 14 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15
2 15 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16
t 16 | 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17
m 617 «| 24 23 22 21 20 19 18
18 | 24 23 22 21 20 19
19 | 24 23 22 21 20
20 24 23 22 21
21} 24 23 22
22 | 24 23

2. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug"h" correction-2 for the
following values of Aa and highest order "h",

Interpolator Aa Highest Order "h"
I 0.1 14
Tr 0.01 13
ill 0.001 12

(9)

(10)

(11)

265

INTERPOLATORS

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 19 0o eee—-e—e9-0-¢-e—8 0000 00000 00000 H-CORR-2
24 20 15 10 5

Row 20 0 e~e—-e—-e—e-6-e-0-@—9 0000 00000 00000 _ INT-IN-2
24 20 15 10 5

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 21 o e—e—e-e—e—-9—e—e-0—#-@ 000 00°000 00000 4H-CORR
24 20 15 10 5 -2-2

Row 22 0 e—e-e-e—e-¢-0-0-e—-@-8 000 00000 00000 INT
24 20 15 10 5

Row 25 0 @-e-e-e—e—e—-9-2-e—__#-@-# 00 00000 00000 H-CORR
24 20 15 10 5 -3-2

Row 26 0 e000 0-0 -$-0-0—_e-#-0 0 0 00000 00000 SINT
24 20 15 10 5

In order to read minus one to lowest order "a" column, columns 1-23 of the "h" correction-3
plughubs provide nines and the 25th plughub provides an eight. The "8" plughub is connected to
the lowest order "a" column of the intermediate counter. The nine plughubs are connected to
the remaining 23 columns of the intermediate counter. If it is desired to read the minus one of
"h" correction-3 into a storage counter A under control of the line of coding (841, A, blank),
the "h" correction-3 plughubs should be plugged to any available row of buss plughubs instead
of to the intermediate plughubs.

The intermediate counter plughubs and the corresponding "h" correction-3 plughubs lie in the
following rows:

Interpolator I ~ functional plugboard, row 21 INTERMED-IN-2, row 22 H-CORR-3;
Interpolator II - MP-DIV plugboard, row 23 INT, row 24 H-CORR-2-3; ‘
Interpolator III - MP-DIV plugboard, row 27 INT, row 28 H-CORR-3-3,

Table 10 shows the necessary plugging for reading "h" correction-3; i.e., minus one, to the
intermediate counter for each highest order "h" column, The number at the top of each column
refers to the intermediate counter plughub. The numbers in the body of the table refer to the
"h" correction-3 plughubs, except that'8' refers to the 25th plughub of the "h" correction-3 row.

3. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug "h'" correction-3 for the
following values of Aa and highest order "h".

Interpolator Aa Highest Order "h"
I 0.1 14
I 0.01 13

mm 0.001 12

266

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 21 | o eee 00000 b o-e-c-o_e-0-0 0 0 0-6 8-0-0 INT-IN-2

24 20 15 10 5
8
Row 22 0 e-e-ee-e +e #8 o—e—o—_0—_0—0-— 0-00 —__ 0000-0 H-CORR-3
24 20 * 6 10 5

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 23 | o e—e—_-0-——_-0-—-9--0-—-0-—-0 0 é 00 _e_¢ 0 7 0 # 9-9 -¢-¢ INT
On 20 15 10 5 ;

oO.

Row 24 elo e—e—e—#4¢—-0—e-o— o—e—_e—__0_0_0-—_¢_0—__0 0-000 H-CORR
24 20 iBT 10 5 -2-3

Row 27 |o pf oe et ef eee & ooo 9-20 _¢—_2 0-20-08 INT
24 20 15 10 5

foe)

Row 28 elo e—e—-e—e—-e—¢—0—e—e—e o—e—_e_ 000 _0—___ 000 -@-09 H-CORR
24 20 15 | 10 5 -3-3

TABLE 10 INTERPOLATION: “h' CORRECTION-3 TO INTERMEDIATE COUNTER

INTERMEDIATE COUNTER COLUMNS
2423 22 2120 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 #7 6 5 432 1
1 | 223 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 '8' 4
2! 323 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4'8' 2 1
3 | 423 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 '8' 3 2 1
4 | 5 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 '8' 4 3 2 1
5 | 623 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7'8' 5 4 3 2 1
£ 6 | 723 22 21 20 19 18 1716 15 14 13 12 i110 9 8 '8' 6 5 4 3 2 t
5 71] 8 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 '8' 76 5 4 3 2 1
S 8g | 9 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 '8' 8 765 43 21
DS 9 | 10 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 '8' 9 8 7 6 &§ 4224
= 10 | 11 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 '8'10 9 8 765 43 21
4 if | 12 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 1413 '8'1110 $ 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 41
| 12 | 13 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 '8' 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4 3 2 1
& 13 | 14 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 '8'13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4 3 2 1
= 14 | 15 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 '8'14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
& 15 | 16 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 '8' 15 1413 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
& 16 | 1723 22 21 20 19 18 '8' 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4 3 2 1
= 17 | 18 23 22 21 20 19 '8!17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 4321
18 | 19 23 22 21 20 '8'18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 765 43 2 41
19 | 20 23 22 21 '8'19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 765 43 21
20 | 21 23 22 '8' 20 19 18 1716 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 76 5 43 21
Zi | 2223 181 Zi 20 19 18 i7 i6 15 i4 if i2 ii i6 9 8 7 6 OS 4 8B
22 | 23 '8' 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 76 5 43 2 41

267

INTERPOLATORS

(12) The "h" columns must be plugged to read from the buss into the intermediate counter; i.e., the
highest order "h" column and the columns to its right are plugged. Since the multiplications
necessary to interpolation are carried on at the operating decimal position, this plugging is
direct.

(13) The intermediate counter plughubs and the corresponding buss plughubs lie in the following rows:
Interpolator I - functional plugboard, row 23 INTERMED-IN-2, row 24 BUSS;

Interpolator IT - MP-DIV plugboard, row16 INT-IN-3, row15 BUSS;
Interpolator III - MP-DIV plugboard, row17 INT-IN-4, row18 BUSS.

(14) Table 11 shows the necessary plugging for the read-in of "h" from the buss to the intermediate
counter for each highest order "h" column. The number at the top of each column refers to the
buss plughub. The numbers in the body of the table refer to the intermediate counter plughubs.

TABLE 11 INTERPOLATION: BUSS TO INTERMEDIATE-IN-2, 3, OR 4
BUSS COLUMNS

24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 56 4 3 2 1

1 1

2 2 1

3 3 2 1

4 4 3 2 1

5 § 4 3 2 1

a 6 6 5 43 2 1
3 1 765 43 2 21
8 8 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1]
= 9 9 8 7 65 4 3 2 1
= 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
s 11 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 2 1
3 12 121110 9 8 7 6 6 4 3 2 1
6 13 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 «1
4 14 1413 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
2 15 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 2 «21
8 16 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
m= 17 17:16 15 14 18 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
18 18 17 16 15 1413 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 43 2 1

19 19 18 17 16 15 1413 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

20 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 1110 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

21 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 &§ 4 3 2 1

22 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 138 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

4. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug the read-in of "h" for
the following values of Aa and highest order "h".

Interpolator Aa Highest Order "h"
I 0.1 14
I 0.01 13

0.001 120

268

(16)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 23 00000 00000 OO @-0-@-0—@—0-€,#-0—#-#-6-0-6 INT -IN-2
24 20 15 10 5

Row 24 00000 00000 0O @-@-@-#—# ¢ 6/00? 6-6-6 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row15 oo000 00000 0 0 © © ee 6-6-9 60 0-¢ 0-9 BUSS
a4 20 15 10

Row16 00000 00000 0 0 @-@-0—-6-@-0 6-6—# 6 -6-@-@ INT-IN-3
24 20 15 10 5

Row 17 o 69 0 2¢02090 090 0 &-—-#-0-6,0—+#6-6+4-6 INT-IN-4
24 20 15 10 5

oO

Row18 00000 00000 0 0 O @-@—# -¢-6-8-6—# 6 -0—6—# BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

The interpolator units read the interpolational coefficients from the functional tape into the
buss with decimal point at the tape decimal position. The coefficients must be read from the
buss into the intermediate counter (C-value plughubs ) for computation at the operating decimal
position, Negative coefficients may not be shifted to the right, since no auxiliary nines are
available to fill in at the left.

The intermediate counter (C-value) plughubs and the corresponding buss plughubs lie in the
following rows of the MP-DIV plugboard:

interpolator I, row 5 C-VALUE-1, row 6 BUSS;
Interpolator II, row 8 C-VALUE-2, row 7 BUSS;
Interpolator I, row9 C-VALUE-3, row10 BUSS.

5, The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug interpolators I and III
for tape decimal point between columns 15,and 16. Piug interpoiator Ii for tape decimai
point between columns 9 and 10, \Ci| < 10°,

MP-DIV PLUGBOA

Row 5 0 ee -0-e—#—e—e 000-009 9 00-00-86 © © #6 C-VAL-1
24 20 15 10 5

Row 6 0 e-e-e-¢-—s 0-0-0 00-0 66-090 8 6 9 8 0 6-0-9 BUSS
24 20 15 id 5

Row 7 0 Pr a e-e-——_0-_ 00 0_0 —_0_ 9-000 0-000 | BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

Row 8 o & e-e-e—0-0 000 —_b_ 0-0-0 000 0-0 oo 10-00 3 32C-VAL-2
24 20 15 10 5
269
_INTERPOLATORS

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 9 0 @~e-¢-e—e—000 00 00 9 0s 000-000-000 C-VAL-3
24 20 15 10 5

Row 10 0 e—e—e-e—e 0-9-9 00 6 0 _¢_0_¢_0_0_0 0 —_0-_s-0-0—0 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

6. The operating decimal point lies betweencolumns 15 and 16. In the functional tape, Aa = 0.1
and highest order "h" = 14. The tape decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug
interpolator I.

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 15 o 000 00000 00000 JI-IN-1

Row 16 o ©00 00000 00000 BUSS

Rows 17 and 18 not used.

Row 19 0 @ 0-0 00-7 #-0—0 0000 00000 00000 £44H-CORR-2
24 20 15 10 5

Row 20 0 @-e-e-e—e—0-0-0-e—8 0000 00000 00000 £4OJINT-IN-2
24 20 15 10 5

Row 21 | o o—e—_e—___0—_0—_0-—_ 09 b e-o-c-o_o-c-e-9 0 0s s-¢9 INT-IN-2
24 20 15 _ 10 5

io)

—e—_o-e-e—-e-@ H-CORR-3
10 5

Row 22 O e-e—e—-0—e_0_0-—0
24 20 8

Row23 00000 00000 0 ee -e-e—e-0-0,e-¢—o-6-6-8-8 INT-IN-2
24 20 15 10 5

Row24 00000 00000 0 o-0-0-e—eecle cose BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 5 0 @-e—e—e—e—0 0-009 9 809 0-_6-9-_0_6 _ 0-69-09 C-VAL-1
24 20 15 10 5

Row 6 0 e—e—e-0—» -s 00 -0— 00-09 0 00-009 _6_-5-_0_0--9 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

7. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15and16, In the functional tape, Aa = 0.01,
highest order "h" = 13 and|C,,| < 109. The tape decimal point lies between columns 9 and
10. Plug interpolator H.
270

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

Row 7 0o o—e—e-_s—-e-—0 0-0-0200 0-_0 —_ 09-0600 #6 6-8
24 20 15 10 5
Row 8 o occ eee ce bees s esse eo celeee
24 20 15 10 5
Row 11 o 00 00000 00000
10 5
Row 12 o 00000 00000 00000
Row15 00000 00000 0O O @6-@—#—@-0—§—0—#6-9-6—8
24 20 15 10 5
Row16 008000 00000 0 0 eee —e-0—0_¢_6 _0-6 0-8-0
24 20 15 id 5
Row 21 o e-e-e-e—e—-9¢—-6-0-e—#-8 000 0000060 0000 0
24 20 15 10 5
Row 22 0 e-—s-e-9—e-# 0 -0-0—#-e 000 00000 009000
24 20 15 10 5
Row 23 ] 0 o-oo 0-9 0-000 6 0-0-0 0 0-0-9 0 9-0-0 0-8
( 20 15 10 5
2
Row 24 Lejo e-se—e4 o—e—_0_0-_0—_ 0-6-0 00-008

24 20

b—2—s—2—_0
I

8. The operating decimal point lies
and highest order "h' = 12, The tape deci

interpolator II.

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 9 0 ¢-e-e-0—__0_ 0 60-6 —__6_0 6,0 0-0-5 0 6-4 _ 6-0-6 6-6
24 20 15 10 5

Row i0 0 #~s—s-—s—~s-s ss soe te set + +t
24 20 15 10 5

Row 13 o 000 00000 00000 00000
Ch 21 .

Row 14 o 000 0000 ees e# 0 00000 00000
24 20 15 10 5

Row17 00000 00000 0 O O @-@-—¢-0—8--6,0—9-90—®
24 20 15 10 5

Row18 00000 00000 00 O @-@—#—0—-6—-¢10— #0044

24

BUSS

C-VAL-2

BUSS
I-IN-1-2
BUSS

INT-IN-3

H-CORR
-2-2

INT

INT

H-CORR
-2-3

between columns 15and16. In the functional tape, Aa = 0.001
mal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug

BUSS

INT-IN~4
(17)

(18)

271
INTERPOLATORS

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 25 0 @—e—e—e——e—-e,0—e-s—__@ 8-8 00 00000 00000 H-CORR

24. 20 15 10 5 -3-2
Row 26 0 e—e—e—e—e-e/e-e-o—e#8 00 00000 00000 INT
24 20 15 10 5
Row 27 lo @_0_0—__0_¢_0—_0_0-—_0—0 é e—e—_0—_0—_0—0-, 0 000-00 INT
24 20 15 10 5
8
Row 28 O e-e-e—e—e0-e_e—_o-0 eo—e—_0_o—_ 0000-00-00 H-CORR
24 20 15 I 10 5 -3-3

For tape positioning, one half the number of arguments in the tape must be set in the push
button switches labeled "Value tape set up 1/2 A values in tape" above the interpolator to be
employed.

The number of interpolational coefficients (including Co) should be set in each of the dial switches
above the interpolator, labeled "Set up number of C-values on each switch". In certain special
cases, the dial switches need not be set alike. In order to position the tape, the right dial switch
is set to the number of interpolational coefficients (including Co) accompanying each argument |
in the tape. The left dial switch is set to the number of interpolational coefficients to be used
in the interpolation computation.
272

(1)

(2)

(3)

CARD FEEDS

The card feeds require plugging for the read-out from the card feed brushes into the buss.
The cardcolumns and corresponding card feed brushes and plughubs are numbered from left to

ane CaracCO.ubins ama COPPesVulitiitig, Las ASE Velie

right, whereas the buss plughubs or the calculator are numbered from right to ieft.

If negative numbers are to be shifted to the left on reading into the calculator, they should be
punched as complements on ten rather than on nine. If negative numbers are to be shifted to
the right on reading into the calculator, auxiliary nines must be filled in to the left by plugging
one brush plughub to more than one buss plughub. One brush plughub should not be plugged to
more than nine buss plughubs.

The card feed plugboard is located to the right of the sequence mechanism.. The brush plughubs
of card feed I lie in vertical row 8 and the corresponding buss plughubs in vertical row 5. The
brush plughubs of card feed II lie in vertical row 4 and the corresponding buss plughubs in ver-
tical row 1.

1. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Cards are to be fed from
both feeds with decimal point between card columns 9 and 10. Plug the card feeds.

CARD CARD
BUSS FEED BUSS FEED
II I
24 oO fe) 1 24 oO fe) 1
} ° fo) o fe)
o fe) fe) fe)
oO fe) oO fe)
20 fe) fo) 5 20 (e) fe) 5
; _) oO ' ' Oo oO
6 fe) fe) °
° o re) °
fo) fe) e =) o re)
154 ° 0 10¢ 154 ° 0 104
! 1 ! |
° re) ) fe) ‘\
o fe) o fo)
fe) o o oO
fe) fe) o oO
10 | o o 15 | id oO fe) id
re) re)
3 3 I L 3 3 I
; o re) Pf } oO oO ;
oO fe) oO o
5 fo) oO 20 5 fe) oO 20
0 fe) o °
fe) o o re)
o re) fo) re)
1 fe) o 24 1 re) o 24

2. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Cards are to be fed from
feed I with decimal point between card columns 15 and 16. Cards are to be fed from feed
Il with decimal point between card columns 3 and 4.
273

CARD FEEDS
CARD CARD
BUSS FEED BUSS FEED
II I
24 fo) ° 1 24 o oO lo
fe) re) WA oO fe) o
re) re) oO rs) fe)
0 oO fe) fe) o
20 o fe) 5 20 fe) oO 50
re) oO oO o fs)
oO o fe) oO
o fo) 0 fe)
oO re) fe) fs)
15 re) fe) 10 oO fe) 10
fe) o oO fe)
fe) fe) o re)
fe) fe) oO re)
o re) fe) oO
10 fe) fe) 15 10 oO fe) 15
oO fe) fo)
oO oO fe)
fe) o fe)
fe) re) ry) o fe)
o Co) 200 50 oO
fe) o o fo) ce)
fe) fe) re) fa) oO
oO oO ro) fe) o
1 fe) to) 240 lo (o)

(4) The"Card Feed Reverse" switches are located to the left of the sequence mechanism. It should
be noted that though these switches reverse the codes of the feeds they do not reverse the plug-

ging.
274

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

CARD PUNCH

The card punch requires plugging of the read-in from the punch counter to the punch magnets.
The card columns are numbered from left to right, whereas the punch counter columns are
numbered from right to left.

To skip a card out, 24 card columns must be punched. If fewer than 24 columns are wired for
punching, zeros in a master card in the duplicating rack will skip the card out.

The plugboard for the card punch is located at the extreme right end of the machine, inside the
cover. Only two sets of plughubs are used, labeled PUNCH MAGNETS and COMP MAG OR
CTR TOT EXIT OR M SIN, the latter set being wired to the punch counter.

1. The operating decimal point lies betweencolumns 15 and 16. Plug the punch to punchcards
with decimal point between columns 9 and 10.

PUNCH MAGNETS
5 id 15 20
Card cols, 1-20 ooo eee eee ee ee eee
| | 25

Card cols, 21-24 © o000M0 00000 00000

COMP MAG OR CTR TOT EXIT OR M S IN

2A 2B 4A 4B 6A 6B
Ctr. cols, 24-5 ae ads

6B
Cir, cols. 4-1 | yr" 00000000 d0000000

Cards may be punched containing a function in the first columns of the ecards and a serial num-
ber in the last columns of the card. After the function is punched, a duplicating card and skip
bar control the punch.

2. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. A function is to be punched
in the first 24 card columns with decimal point between card columns 9 and 10. Serial
numbers are to be punched in card columns 70, 73-76 and 79. Plug the punch.

PUNCH MAGNETS
5 10 15 20
2 © 0 6-6-0644 _4,_ 46-64

25 30 35

9

1 “Ne

' -

28 A
[o)

oe
oO
°
i)
oO
>
ce)
i)
Oo
o
ie)
°
is)
ie)
io}
is)

~7
yaa

45 50
0 0 o0.6Uu86UM GO

[e)
°
°
°
°o

oo} 60 (0

65 NX = N 80
0 oJojo]oo00o0 2 08 s ¢ 0
COMP MAG OR CTRITOT EXIT OR) MS |IN
2A | 2B 4A 4B 6A 6B

\6B
6» 0000 0000 0000 0000

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

@

275

PRINTING

The printing operation requires plugging for:

dropping off zeros to the left,

printing a minus sign,

the read-out of the print counter to the typewriter,
horizontal spacing of digits,

printing a decimal point,

dropping off zeros to the right,
tabulating and returning the carriage,
resetting print and print step counters,
vertical spacing,

adding a half-correction,

printing in half time.

Aan mos OO D>

The plugging of each typewriter is complete and independent. The sequence of printing oper-
ations is controlled by a print step counter which advances at the rate of nine steps per second,
The read-out of this counter is wiredto 49 column selection plughubs, labeled COL-SEL-PRINT-~1
and lying in rows 1, 2 and 3 of the functional plugboard for typewriter I, and COL-SEL-PRINT -2
lying in rows 8, 9 and 10 of the functional plugboard for typewriter II. :

In order to drop off zeros to the left, for typewriter I:

A. plughubs 24 and 25 of row 5 (RO-CONTROL-RELS) are connected, ;
B. plughub 25 of row 6 is plugged to the n+ 2nd plughub of row 5, where the printed deci-
mal point lies between columns n and n+1 of the print counter.

In order to drop off zeros to the left, for typewriter II:

A. plughubs 24 and 25 of row 12 (RO-CONTROL-RELS) are connected,
B. plughub 25 of row 13 is plugged to the n+ 2nd plughub of row 12, where the printed
decimal point lies between columns n and n+1 of the print counter.

No plughubs are available for dropping off zeros to the left if the printed decimal point lies
between columns 22 and 23 or between columns 23 and 24, If for typewriter I the 25th plughub
of row 6 is plugged to the 23rd plughub of row 5, or if for typewriter II the 25th plughub of row
13 is plugged to the 23rd plughub of row 12, then, ,

(a) if the printed decimal point lies between columns 22 and 23, decimal quantities will be
printed with no zero preceding the decimal] point;

(b) if the printed decimal point lies between columns 23 and 24, decimal quantities will be
printed with no zero preceding the decimal point and if the digit following the decimal
point should be a zero, a space will occur instead of a printed zero.

In order to print the minus sign preceding a negative number, the plughub of the print counter
read-out next above the plughub wired to print the highest significant digit must be plugged to a
column selection plughub. Negative numbers may be printed as complements on nine by throw-
ing the "Print Complement Switches" located to the right of the MP-DIV plugboard.

The plughubs of the print counter read-out corresponding to the columns of the print counter
containing the digits to be printed must be plugged to column selection plughubs, The print
counter read-out plughubs are in row 4 for typewriter I and row 11 for typewriter II.

If the digits of the quantity to be printed are to be spaced in horizontal groups, Spaces must be
plugged from plughubs 11-25 of row 3 for typewriter I, from plughubs 11-25. of row 10 for type-
writer Il, These spaces are plugged to the appropriate column selection plughubs between the
connections from the print counter read-out plughubs. :
276
PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

(7) The decimal point is plugged from the 25th plughub of row 1 for typewriter I, of r

ow
a? ed han anmlewan anlantinn nilas.
writer II,to the column selection plughub lying between those two plughubs which are co

to the print counter read-out columns either side of the assumed decimal point.

(8) Zeros may be dropped off to the right of a quantity under control of the code 87 (called the
"argument control") in the Out column of the line of coding initiating printing. One of the first
two plughubs in row 18 is connected to the column selection plughub next after the plughub con-
nected to the last digit to be printed.

(9) ‘If only one vertical column of numbers is to be printed, a tab is plugged immediately after the
last digit, five column selection plughubs are left blank and a second tab is plugged for the car-
riage return, This second tab is converted to a carriage return by adjusting the right hand
margin stop. If more than one vertical column of numbers is to be printed, a tab is plugged
immediately after the last digit of each quantity. The tab after the last quantity printed on any
horizontal line is converted to a carriage return. Eight tab plughubs are provided for each
typewriter. They are plughubs 21-24 of rows 1 and 2 for typewriter I, of rows 8 and 9 for type-
writer I.

(10) The print step counter and print counter are reset simultaneously. Six column selection plug-
hubs are left blank after the last tab and then the reset is plugged. The reset plughub is the
25th plughub of row 2 for typewriter I and of row 9 for typewriter IL.

1. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug typewriter I to print

quantities, which may be positive or negative, to 8 decimal places, grouped by threes to
the right and left of the decimal point, argument control after 2 decimal places.

DP TAB COL-SEL“PRINT 1 ote |
Row i é a) - eee es os!

G e
25| | 21 1 | 5 | /0 T 15 | 19
R TAR i
Row 2 0000 9 re oo 0 010 e 00006898 06°08 oo
[os 21 (20 * 25 30 35 i 39
SPACES
Row 3 009000 Go é 00 > 0o0o°0 Par Oo o10;/0 0 oooo9dos9
— 40 45 49

PRINT! onl fn -ro / /}

“°° oo0o0°0

Row 4 0 ede ete ote

25 24 20 5
C RO- CONTROL- RELS

Row § @e000 cococf2820 ooeooe oo 0009 oo ee 9
25 24 20 | 15 10 5

Row 6 bo0000 000090 0oo000 00000 o0000

25 24 20 15 10 5 (4-5)

Row18 o8000 00000 00000 00000 0000 e—
21

2. The operating decimal point lies between columns 21 and 22. Plug typewriter II to print
quantities, which may be positive or negative, to 21 decimal places, digits in groups of 3,
5, 5, 5, 3 to the right of the decimal point.
Row 8

Row 9

Row 10

Row 11

Row 12

Row 13

Row 18

PRINTING
DP TAB COL-SEL-PRINT -2
e Crom e eo “ero e—e—_9—_0—0
as] | oat il a0 10 er 19
R| TAB |
0000 o—e—9—o—o e/e ee |b 0000 jobeooon
25 21) 1420 25 30 35 39
SPACES 1
C000 O]/]/® 0000 068 086([000b6 0] 00000
40 45 49
PRINT-CTR-RO = -—
0 o—to o-o-+_0-e o-0-i_0-0 0-0-6600 6-6-0
25 24 20 15 10 5
Cc RO-CONTROL-RELS
e000 00000 00000 00000 00000
25 24 20 15 10 5
0000 00000 00000 00000 o0o0000
25 24 20 15 10 5 (4-5)
060000 00000 00000 00000 ooaoodo0
21

217

3. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug typewriter I to print
all 23 digits of quantities, positive or negative, grouped by fives to the right and left of the
decimal point, argument control after 2 decimal places.

Row 1

Row 2

Row 3

Row 4

Row 5

Row 6

Row 18

DP TAB COL-SEL-PRINT-1

e 00 80 Zor 8 oe eo. —

25] | 21 i | 5 10 15 19

R TAB i |

000 0 | e-e,e—e @| | ee—-e—e—e 0000 0 ofo o

25 21 | 20 25 30 35 39
SPACES L fi

C0 0O0Ol0 0006] G00 0 €lo 0086 ofllio oa 00
40 45 49

PRINT-CTR}RO

o e-elee codes ole beelee cote

25 24 20 15 10 5

Cc RO-CONTROL-RELS

eeo000 000 © 00000 Q0000 00000

25 24 20 | 15 10 5

boooo 00000 00000 D0000 00000

25 24 20 15 10 5 (4-5)

00000 GCO0000 00000 00000 0000 e—

21
278

(11)

(12)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

The first ten plughubs of rows 38 and 39 control the vertical grouping of quantities printed on
typewriter I. The second set of ten plughubs on the same rows serve the same purpose for
typewriter II. The vertical spacing of each typewriter is under control of the read-out of a
line step counter (LS; and LSo). These counters step every time a carriage return occurs.
Various vertical groupings are possible but the pattern must repeat in groups of ten lines or
less. At the end of the desired grouping, the line step counter must be reset. This reset is
obtained by connecting plughub R (6 for typewriter I, 16 for typewriter II in row 39) to the line
step counter read-out. When the step counter resets, a single line space is obtained. If an
extra vertical space is desired, one of the extra space plughubs (1-5 for typewriter I, 11-15 for
typewriter II in row 39) must be plugged to the step counter read-out.

4, Plug typewriter I for vertical groups alternately of 3 and 4 quantities. Plug typewriter II
for vertical groups of 8 quantities.

Row 38 00000 0000 00000 00900 09900
9 8)7 6 5 43211098765 4(5 21 10

Row 33 cooo6 ooood

5. Plug typewriter I for vertical groups of 4 quantities. Plug typewriter for vertical groups
of 5 quantities.

Row 38 00000 0000 00000 00000 0000
98765 43211098765 /4321 10

0 00006 00000

Row39 00000 0000 oo000
R_ EXTRA SP 2 R EXTRA SP1

The print counters may be plugged for a “half pick-up" which adds or subtracts five in the
column to which it is plugged, according as the quantity in the print counter is positive or nega-
tive. Note that the typewriter reverse switches do not change over the half pick-up, which is
not reversed but continues to add into the print counter for which it is coded and plugged. The
half pick-up impulse plughubs lie in rows 6 and 13 for print counters I and Il respectively,
labeled IMPULSE 1/2 CORR. The impulse plughubs are plugged to rows 7 and 14 for print
counters I and II respectively, labeled CTR.

6. The operating decimai point lies between columns i5andi6, Plug print counter I for a haif
pick-up correcting the eighth decimal place.

Row 6 0 @—e—e—e—e—ee-0 900000980 o—__9e—-0 1/2 CORR
25 24 20 15 10 5 (4-5)

24 20 15 10 5 ]

7. The operating decimal point lies between columns 19 and 20. Plug print counter II for a
half pick-up correcting the tenth decimal place.
Row 13° 0 @—e-e—e—e—e—e—4

Row 14

25 24

Oo @6e—e—#—0—o—¢

24

20

20

PRINTING

}-—-o-—--0—_ 0000-0

15

>—o—__0—_0—_0-_0-—-0—__6

15

1

10

oo-e—-e-p-2-0 6

5 (4-5)

279

1/2 CORR

CTR

8. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16, Plug print counter and type-
writer I to print on the same horizontal line:

(a) an argument, zeros dropped off after 2 decimal places,
(b) a positive or negative quantity to 10 decimal places, digits grouped by fives to the right

Plug the line step counter for vertical groups of six lines.

Row 1

Row 2

Row 3

Row 4

Row 5

Row 6

Row 18

Row 38

Row 39

COL-SEL-PRINT-1

and left of the decimal point, half pick-up correcting the tenth decimal place.

DP TAB .
e 000 0 e-0_9-e—_0 @¢ 6 eo a
25] 21 1 | 5 io 7 15 [
R TAB |

0000 | eee 0 colo colo o@ oo 0fo00000
25 21 | 20 25 30 35 39

SPACES Lt
0000010000 0;/f00e8 08/0 0000/00000
7 40 45 49
PRINT-CTRIRO

o eelee eotbees cleeocse b oslee 00000
25 24 20 15 10 5
Cc RO-CONTROL-RELS
@eoo090 000 o 00000 o0o0o0000 00000
25 24 20 ] 15 10 5

a0

ao

ano

R=)

15
COUNTER
15

900000

moO
wo
No
=O
=O
OQ

°
°
°

o
XTRA SP 2

bi oO

IMPULSE 1/2 CORR
}—_0-0-0--0--0-__-0--0--0--0--0

10

10

600000

oo
oo
a0
ao

ano

0000

No
oO
ro)

=O

omme)
432

00000
EXTRA SP 1
280

(13)

_ (14)

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

If maximum reliability is required of the typewriters, they should be plugged to print in half

time, In this case. a blank plughub is left between the column selection nluchubs connected to

time. In this case, a blank hub is left between the column selection plughubs connected to
successive digits uniess there is already a space,a decimal point or an argument control plug-
ged between them.

9. The operating decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16. Plug typewriter II to print in
half time, positive or negative quantities, to 8 decimal places, digits grouped by threes to
the right and left of the decimal point, argument control after 2 decimal places, half pick-
up to correct the eighth decimal place. Plug the line step counter for vertical groups of

five lines.
DP TAB COL-SEL-PRINT-2
Row 8 ¢ 00. Oo re) o o re) re) oO ¢ |
as] | eel 13 \% ? wf f? As ? 19
R TAB f t
Row 9 o0o000!lo fe) ole fe) P!o o!0 00
SPACES|| 2 |
Row10 ooooodo o ofo 0 \ &ollo € ololololoo fomme)
a 40 45 49
| | | | | PRINT-CTR-RO
Row ll o é ® $0@6d6 @oo0]o0 olo 0 o
25 24 20 | (is 10 5
c RO-CONTROL-RELS
RowiZ ee0o000 000 0 00000 DO0000 Oao000
25 24 20 | 15 10 5
IMPULSE 1/2 CORR
Row 13 e—_e—-e—_0-—_0—_0—_0-—_0-—_9-—_ 0-0 0-0-0 —__ 0-0-8 — i
25 24 20 15 10 5 {4-5}
COUNTER |
Row 14 0 e000 0-00-04 0-00-00 0-0-0 o—e-4-0-0
24 20 15 10 5

j

Row18 o0000 00000 00000 00000 0000 ee
1

Row 38 00000 0000 090000 00000 00000
Senn eeeneeee 4321 10

Row39 o0000 0000 00000 00000 00000

R_ EXTRA SP 2 R EXTRA SP 1

The "Typewriter Reverse Switches" are located to the left of the sequence mechanism. It should
be noted that, as stated in note (12), though these switches reverse the codes of the print counters
and the codes initiating printing, they do not reverse either the plugging or the half pick-up
coding.
281

SAMPLE PLUGGING

The plugging of the calculator is shown for operating decimal point between columns 15 and 16.

Division is plugged to provide 7, 14 or 22 digits in the PQcounter under control of Miscellaneous
codes 643, 6431 and blank respectively.

Interpolator I is plugged for a functional tape in which Aa = 0.1, highest order "h" = 14 and
the tape decimal point lies between columns 15 and 16.

Interpolator Il is plugged for a functional tape in which Aa = 0.01, highest order "h" = 13 and
the tape decimal point lies between columns 9 and 10.

Typewriter I is plugged for positive or negative quantities, all 23 columns of digits grouped by
fives to the right and left of the decimal point, argument control after 2 decimal places. Line step
counter 1 is plugged for vertical groups of six lines.

Typewriter IT is plugged for positive or negative quantities, digits grouped by threes to the
right and left of the decimal point, argument control after 2 decimal places, half pick-up to correct
the eighth decimal place. Line step counter 2 is plugged for vertical groups of five lines.

The following switch settings must be made:

Divide N minus decimal switches = 07;

‘Log N value switches = 07;

Interpolator I, push button switches = 0051, dial switches = 3,
Interpolator III, push button switches = 0044, dial switches = 5,

Interpolator II reads a value tape and therefore requires no plugging. The card feed and card
punch pluggings are assumed to be direct and are not shown.
282

Row 1

Row 2

Row 3

Row 4

Row 5

Row 6

Row 8

Row 9

Row 10

Row il

Row 12

Row 13

Row 16

Row 17

Row 18

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

boooo 00800

fo0be00 00000 00000
28 20 15 10 5
o—_e-—0—_0—_0—_, 60808 00000 000090 ooo0o09
25 20 15 10 5
oO 0090 0oo0o0090 00 eee 0—o—_-4—_6__0_0_4#-0
46 45 40 35 30
24 20 15 10 5
24 20 15 10 5
2.).~SCOUOO””~*~*ti‘“‘iSH!™S*‘(‘(‘(‘(‘:sC*é~CSCS*~<‘(“(<‘<‘“<Oti‘CSéC;S:S
oo00o00c0d 009000 oooa0og 900000 oo0oo0o00a0o0
24 20 15 10 5
ooa0go00 0000890 00000 000090 0000890
24 20 15 10 5
24 20 15 10 5
24 20 15 10 5
00000 o0oo00oo0o890 000090 co0080 oo00 0
4 20 15 10 5
ooo0oo090 o0o0606Cc06CO0UCUCO8U 000090 00000 0000 0
6543 21
fe} 00°90 00000 0ooo0o090 oo00090
6543\21
ow 000 coo ee besos oeoeceo coef.
24 20 15 10 5
00000 00009 oooo9090 00000 0000900
24 20 15 10 5
0008908 (0 00000 0ooo0o0090 00o06c066C08l(68 oo0o0090
24 20 i5 i6 5
00000 o0oo00d Oo cower oore eee
24 20 15 10 5
oo0oo0o07090 00000 0 O @~e—e—e0_e_¢_0_0-_0-0_0-—0
24 20 15 10 5

PLACE LIM.
PQ CTR
PQ CTR
P-OUT
C-VAL-1
BUSS
BUSS
C-VAL-2
C-VAL-3
BUSS
BUSS

I-IN-1-2

INT-IN-3
INT-IN-4

BUSS
Row 19

Row 20

Row 21

Row 22

Row 23

Row 24

Row 25

Row 26

Row 27

Row 28

SAMPLE PLUGGING

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD (continued)

090000 00000 e+ +— 2 0-9-0 0s 20-09
24 20 15 10 5

0 0 0 @e0-0-0-0-0$-0-0-0 0 0-8-8 00 co000
24 22 20 15 10 5
00000 00000 00000 000 00000
24 20 15 10 5
00000 00000 00000 000 oo000
24 : 20 15 10 5
00000 00000 00000 000 00000
24 20 15 10 5

8

00000 00000 00000 000 00000
24 20 15 10 5

0 @-e—e-0—e-_-9-0-0-e—_@-@ 000 000 00000
24 20 15 10 5

O e000 0--¢-0-0--0—9-9 000 000 oo0000
24 20 15 10 5

fe) e002 0-0-9 0-00 6 0-0 00-0 0-0-9 0-0 0-0-8
24 20 15 10 5

8

O @-e-e—e-—e-¢-9-8—0 © 0-2-9080 6 _¢ 0-90 0-0
24 20 13] 10 5

283

BUSS

1/27

H-CORR-2-2

INT

INT

H-CORR-2-3

H-CORR-3-2

INT

INT

H-CORR-3-3
284

Row

Row

Row

Row

Row

a

Row

Row

Row

Row 10

Row il

Row 12

Row 13

Row 14

Row 15

Row 16

Row 17

Row 18

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

DP TAB
é¢ 00 0 eee 2 oo 9-0 6e-0 6 » TYPEWRITER I
I 1 5 10 15
R TAB
0000 ® e@ooo0oo0 oO ojo,o |COL-SEL
| % | tila 1 __|{30 35
SPACES ‘
00000)/00006, 8000 6j/0 0 0/@ 0/0 00 0)0
40 45
—TT7]
0 e-ele—e a ae ele eto ¢eelee ooo |PRINT CTR-RO
24 20 15 10 5
Cc
@eeoo0o90coo0o90 0 00000 00000 090009 0 RO-RELS
25 24 20 I 15 10 5
boo000 ccooce eoceaene 909900 00000 1/2 CORR
25 24 20 15 10 5 (4-5)
00000 00000 00000 0000060 00000 CTR
24 20 15 10 5
DP TAB
a oc oO @4 e ee ce, Cah TYPEWRITER II
LL 1 3] \"/i0 | 15
R TAB — *|
¢ooc oc of ae ee 6 9 00 010 @ ololo o o of@ ojo{| |COL-SEL
20| | 25 30 35 [J
SPACES
0000 0f{]0 ojo ¢ 000¢68 0 ojojoo 000 0j0
| 40 45
0 oso e efoto os d —@ &e00 900 010 PRINT CTR-RO
24 20 15 10 5
Cc
eeoo00coo090 o. 00000 00000 0000 0||RO-RELS
25 24 20 15 10 5
_j
6 eee ee oe) 1/2 CORR
25 24 20 15 10 rye (4-5)
5 eo ee eee te cee ee ose lcleotes » CTR
24 20 15 10 | 5 |
oO 00000 00000 0000 0}|I-IN-i
6
fe) 000 00000 0000 0;;BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
00000 00000 00000 00000 990090 0
00000 00000 00000 0000090 ooo é eH
21
Row 19
Row 20
Row 21
Row 22
Row 23
Row 24
_ Row 25
Row 26
_Row 27

Row 28

Row 29.

Row 30

Row 31

Row 32

Row 33

Row 34

Row 35

SAMPLE PLUGGING

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD (continued)

O @—e—e—e—e_9-0-8-@—@ 0000 odO00000 00000
24 20 15 10 5
Oo 6—e0—e—\e-0-0@-@—89 0000 O0000 00000
24 20 15 10 5
oO o—e—0—__0-—-8- 9-6-8 } o—0—_0—__0-—__0_@-_ 4 _0_0__0_0_@0 0
24 20 15 10 5
8
oO ooo _6_e 96-0 ee _t-_o—__#_0—_0_s_¢__¢_6_0—0—0
24 20 ° As 10 5
00000 00000 0 eee t—--e_0_0,0—_0—__0_0_0_@_0
24 20 15 10 5
000006062@d€«606UM0U6U00DULUOUOl lO CUO —O—O-—-8—-6--6-- 8-0 —_8 0088
24 20 15 10 5
24 20 15 10 5
°o o-0-0_o 0-0 0 0 0-40-00 0-0-0 10) 00000
24 21 20 15 10 5
Le) o—e—_0__0—_0_0--0—_0__0-_0_0_0_8__0-@-@-60 0 oOo0o0o0d0
24 21° 20 15 10 5
oO oo 0 000 o—o—o-0-0-0 0 0c 0 0 0 0 -0-0-0-0
24 20 15 10 5
00 oele—e o—e_0e—___0_0-—0-—0—__@_0_¢_0—_0—_00 0-6 6
24 20 . 15 10 5
0-0-0000 0 0 0 6 0-4-0 0-0 0 0 0-0 o ao0000
25 21 20 15 10 5
90000 00000 00000 00000 0 oelee
45 40 35 30
ie) d
24 20 15 10 5
oO >
24 20 15 10 5

0 0 0 6 -e—e 000-0 0-00 008-8 0 0
24 22 20 15 10 5

0o00080 00000 eveeo—eos+o esse

24 20 15 10 5

285

H-CORR-2
INT-IN-2
INT-IN-2
H-CORR-3
INT-IN-2
BUSS

BUSS
LIO-OUT
EIO-IN
BUSS

BUSS
EIO-OUT
EIO-OUT
SIO-IN II
BUSS

BUSS

SIO-OUT-I
286

' Row 36

Row 37

Row 38

Row 39

Row 40

°

24 22 20

24 20

00000

oooooj;co0

e—e_0—__0--0 0080

PLUGGING INSTRUCTIONS
FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD (continued) \
p—0-0-0—9-9-9 00 00000
15 10 5
15 10 5
00000 00080 00000
5|/4321109876)5 4321 10
00000 0000 00000
R R
0 00000 0000 o—eele ee
10 10 5

| SIO-OUT-1L

BUSS
287

CHAPTER VI
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

In most cases there are several methods of adapting a problem for machine computation, After
all methods of attack have been considered, one usually will show distinct advantages as regards
speed and ease of operation and reliability of the checking procedures employed,

Since machine time is extremely valuable, the first consideration in planning a sequence tape is
to reduce the computation time to a minimum consistent with the required accuracy, However, a fine
balance must be maintained between computation time and the ensuing complexity of the coding, The
conservation of one or two cycles of machine time will, for example, not be profitable if it means that
the counters containing essential parts of a computation must be reset before the results are checked,

The second consideration in planning a computation is ease of operation, If switches must be
altered or sequence tapes interchanged at relatively short intervals of time, these operations will
constitute not only a loss of time but also a source of error.

Ease of rerunning a computation in the wake of an error and the possibility of computing for
specific values of the independent variables must also be considered, Machine failures occur from
time to time, The amount of time consumed in detecting the source of an error is usually dependent
upon the complexity of the coding, The time required to resume operation after an error, which is
dependent upon the number of manipulations the attendant must perform, should be reduced to a mini-
mum in a well planned sequence tape, Specifically, no decisions or computations should be required
on the part of the attendant. The operating instructions and the values printed or punched should pro-
vide all the information necessary for rerunning any part of the computation,

Finally, of paramount importance in the design of a sequence control tape are the checks on the
computation, These must insure positive proof that the output values obtained are precisely those
required and that they are correct to the desired accuracy, Four classes of errors must be taken
into account: (1) errors inherent in the mathematical formulae; (2) errors produced by a repetition
of the four fundamental operations of arithmetic; (3) errors introduced by manual operations; (4)errors

due to mechanical or electrical failures within the calculator itself,
288

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

The errors inherent in the mathematical formulae must be evaluated during the preliminary
analysis before the coding is begun. Decisions must be made as regards the number of terms of an
infinite series to be retained, the number of times an iterative process must be applied and the order
of interpolation required, These decisions are dependent upon the interval and increment of the inde-
pendent variable and the accuracy desired in the computed results,

The loss of accuracy due to the repetition of the four basic arithmetical operations in a finite
digital calculator must be subjected toa detailed analysis. For each operation, the maximum error
must be assumed and the error of the final result computed. The simple expedient of using a certain
number of extra computing columns will, in general, nullify errors from this source, Thus the choice
of the operating decimal position will in part be dictated by the number of extra columns so allowed,

The two sources of humanerror mentioned in Chapter V, incorrect switch settings and incorrect
plugging, are perhaps the most serious of all, If the mathematical nature of a problem permits a
check of the final results, independent of the method of computation, the errors of the manual oper~
ations will be detected, If, however, the only checks which may be applied are those of an operational
character; i.e., substantiating the fact that the desired sequence of operations has been correctly
performed by the calculator, such errors as incorrect switch settings may not be detected. Hence
meticulous precision on the operator's part and careful checking of all manual operations are essential.

Mechanical and electrical failures within the calculator itself are the final source of errors
which must be checked. If a problem is properly coded, either operational or end result checks must
be provided to detect such failures. In no case should the caicuiator be permitted to run more than
twenty minutes without checks.

Although the probability is exceedingly small, a failure in the checking circuits of the machine
may occur, To provide for the detection of such an event, all check quantities should be printed and
kept under observation, If the check quantities are printed before the checking operation is performed,
in case of failure, the magnitude and conformation of the error may provide a clue to its source. ff
possible, all quantities essential to the computation of the value being checked should be preserved
in the calculator until the check is completed, These quantities may then be printed or punched and

manual computation used to aid in tracing the source of the error. If the length of a computation is
289

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

not too great, a rerun after a failure, with the tolerances set arbitrarily low so that the machine will
stop even though the computation is correct, may provide correct values for comparison with those
in error, Such a comparison will often lead directly to the particular source of difficulty,

Before the actual coding is begun, the storage counters should be allocated to the various parts
of the computation, Then as the coding proceeds, a diagram should be prepared showing the lines of
coding by which the counters are reset and the quantities they contain at every cycle of the computation,

A clear copy of the coding must be provided before an attempt is made to run a sequence tape
on the calculator, The lines of perforations in the tape should be numbered to correspond to the lines
of coding, In the coding sheets, colored indicators should call attention to all prints, interpolations
and checks, All functional operations should be separated by horizontal rulings,

Before a sequence tape is run on the machine,a manual computation of a degenerate case, of the
first point to be evaluated or of some arbitrary point, should be made. Comparison of the results of
this manual computation with the results yielded by the tape will serve to check the coding and punch-
ing of the tape, The manual computation should parallel the operations dictated by the tape so that
intermediate results may be compared if the final results fail to check,

Every sequence control tape must be accompanied by operating instructions, These instructions
must be sufficiently complete to enable an experienced attendant to set up the problem and operate the
calculator, All value and functional tapes and cards supplied with a problem must be thoroughly
checked before a problem is ready to run, The only remaining source of input values, the switch
settings, must be checked just before the machine is started, Directions for checking the switch set-
tings must be given in the operating instructions, The quantities standing in the switches must be
printed or punched for checking, either under control of a Sequence tape or under manual control of
the keyboard ordinarily used in the preparation of sequence tapes (see page 45, last paragraph), If
blank tape is placed across the reading pins of the Sequence mechanism, this keyboard maybe connec-
ted to the calculator to transmit successive single lines of coding to the machine. Only an experienced
attendant should attempt to use the keyboard, however, because of the rapid manipulations necessary
in using automatic codes, The keyboard is most frequently used for printing and punching quantities

when testing to locate a source of error,
290

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

It is often necessary to make preliminary computations and to set certain values in storage
counters before a computation is begun, In such an event a startingtape is used. It is usually a short
two-ended control tape and may well include printing quantities from the switches, checking plugging
and resetting storage counters. If possible starting tapes should be used only at the beginning of a
problem or to re-establish operation after failure to check, In general, they should not be used at the
start of each individual run since too much time would be wasted in changing control tapes,

The operating instructions accompanying a sequence tape must include all of the following in-
formation.

(1) Switches,
All quantities to be set in switches must be listed. Both symbols andnumerical values must
be stated, All tolerances must be accompanied bya reference to the quantity to be checked.
(2) Tapes, .
All value and functional tapes, together with a statement of the interpolator on which they
are to be placed, must be listed, All tapes must be clearly labeled and starting lines indi-
cated, On the sequence tape itself, the starting line and all rerun lines must be marked.
(3) Card Feeds.
The cards required by each feed must be identified by their serial numbers. The relation-
ship of the serial numbers to the argument and function being computed must be clearly
stated, In the instructions for reruns or any other special runs, further instructions for
the replacement of cards must be given.
(4) Card Punch,
The quantities being punched and the printed values with which they may be compared must
be identified, The composition of serial numbers in relation to the argument and function
must be made clear, Instructions must be given for the labeling, filing and storing of all
cards punched.
(5) Typewriters.
The mathematical symbols of the quantities printed and their relative positions must be

stated, Sample headings of pages or rolls should be cited, It must also be stated whether
291

SOLUTION OF EXAM PLES

or not the typewriter reverse switches may be used since these switches do not reverse the
half pick-up coding.
(6) Storage Counters.
All manual resets of storage counters must be listed. In particular, if a counter is used to
accumulate for each quantity or group of quantities printed,and stop the machine at the end
of a page, this counter must be identified,
(7) Functional Counters,
All manual resets required must be listed,
(8) Checks,
All checks must be listed and the following information supplied for each check:
(a) quantity checked;
(b) amount of tolerance and switch from which it is derived;
(c) line of coding containing the check procedure;
(d) procedure in case of failure to check.
(9) Rerun Instructions,
In general, these will be of two types:
(a) rerun of the point on which the failure occurred; .
(b) rerun of any other point.

Complete plugging instructions must also accompany every sequence control tape, These in-
structions must include all of the following information: (1) a statement of the position of the operating
decimal point of the calculator and of the typewriter and punch decimal points, if these differ; (2) a
list of the units of the calculator employed in the computation and diagrams of their plugging; (3) the
switch settings for division, logarithms and interpolation must be listed if these functions are to be
used; (4) for each typewriter, the horizontal grouping of the digits to be printed must be stated, the
vertical grouping of the lines of the tabular values must be given, plugging diagrams for each type-
writer must be provided.

If the logarithm, exponential, sine or interpolator units are to be used by a sequence tape, these

units should be tested on known arguments before the tape itself is tested, Such known arguments
292

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

must include, for the exponential and sine units, both positive and negative values. In the case of the
sine unit, arguments from each of the four quadrants using both the sine and cosine series should be
chosen. The reading pins of the interpolators should be tested by reading known values such as di-
agonal numbers.

If a sequence tape is of such general interest that it will be preserved in the tape library, its
starting tape should be designed with care in order to check all switch settings, all plugging and all
of the functional units employed, as well as to compute the initial values required by the main control
tape. However, for problems to be run but once on the calculator, the starting tape should be as
simple as is consistent with adequate provision for setting up the problem and rerunning in case of
failures,

In the preparation of control tapes and operating instructions, a standard practice is necessary
since the operation of large scale calculating machinery on a continuous basis is of necessity a group
enterprise. The methods and techniques employed must be standardized in order that the required
results may be obtained with a minimum of special instructions, The foregoing discussion covers the
more important rules of coding developed in nearly two years of operation of the caiculator, However,
so brief a description cannot be expected to cover all the details involved, These will be illustrated
by means of examples chosen for mathematical simplicity in order that the coding and checking may
be the focal points of the discussion.

Example 1. It is required to evaluate the polynomial,

F(x) = x? 4 3x - 3x2 /4 ~ 22x + 3,

by successive multiplications, in the interval 5x S10, with ax = 0.01, The values of F(x) are to
be punched in tabulating machine cards for use in further computation, Each card must be identified
by a serial number consisting of the argument, x,, punched with decimal point between card columns
75 and 76 (machine columns 5 and 6) and a one in the 80th card column (1 in Ist machine column), It
is not required to print the values of F(x), One value of F(x) is to be computed during each revolution
of the control tape. The tape is to be designed so that it may be rolled back and rerun without any
additional manipulations, The starting tape is to be designed so that it may be used to re-establish

the computation for any.arbitrary value of the argument,
293
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

lf F(x) is written in the form,
F(x) = (((y +3), - 3/4)x, ~ 22)K, +3,
it should be clear that only three multiplications will be required to evaluate the given polynomial, In
general a polynomial of nth degree will require not more than n multiplications, The constants will
be supplied from switches, Since F(x) <2 x 104 in the interval under consideration, the standard

position of the operating decimal point, between columns 15 and 16, may be assumed,

Switch Settings
No, | Code Setting and Purpose
1 741 Ax = 1 in 14th machine column; increment of argument for computing
2 742 AX = 1 in 4th machine column; increment of argument for punch card serial
numbers
4 743 1 in 1st machine column; punch card code for F(x); zero check tolerance
5 7431 0.75
6 7432 22
7 74321 | 3
9 751 Xp-1 = argument for computing; decimal point between columns 15and 16; used
in starting tape only
10 752 Xn-1 + 3; decimal point between columns 15 and 16; used in starting tape only
11 7521 X,-1 = argument for punch card serial numbers; decimal point between col-
umns 5 and 6; used in starting tape only

Since the argument is always 25, containing at least one non-zero digit, and is always used as
the multiplier, four lines of coding may be interposed between the read-in of MP and the read-out of
the product, The resets of the counters receiving the products, and the additions of the successive

constants, are interposed in the multiplications,

Starting Tape Line | out | | misc.
reset ctr, 1 1 IF 1 7

X,.1 from sw. 9 to ctr, 1; argument for computing 2 | 751 1 7

294

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

reset ctr. 2

x + 3 from sw, 10 to ctr. 2

n-1
reset ctr. 64

Xy-1 from sw. 11 to ctr. 64; argument for punch card serial
number

Main Control Tape

Ax from sw. 1 to ctr. 1; ctr,1 = Xy-1 14% = %3 argument for
computing
Ax from sw, Z to cir, 64; cir, 64 = x +AX = X_; argument
n-1 n
for punch card serial number
4x from sw. 1 to ctr, 2; ctr.2 =x, 1, +4x+ 3 = xt 3

X, + 3 from ctr. 2 to MC Rerun line
Xn from ctr, 1 to MP

reset ctr, 3
- 0.75 from sw, 5 to ctr. 3
&, + 3)x, to ctr, 3; ctr. 3 = (x, + 3)x, - 0.75

(x, + 3)x, - 0.75 from ctr, 3 to MC

x, from cir, i to MP

reset ctr, 4

- 22 from sw. 6 to ctr. 4

.

(Ky + 3)x, - 0.75)x, to cir, 4; cir. 4 = (x, + 3px, - O.75)xy - 22

n

out | In. | misc.
2 2 1
152 «12 1
7 ” 7
1521 |7 7
"41 It 7
2 imag la 7
741 2 7
2 1 =|
7
i 7
"
7
lox 21 "
7431 (21 32
21 7
—
21 71 = «(7
| 7
i 7
7
7
3 3 7
7432 «(|3 32
3 7

295

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line || OUT IN MISC,
(x, + 3x, - 0.75)x_ - 22 from ctr. 4 to MP 22 13 761 7
23 7
24
x, from ctr. 1 to MP 25 1 7
26 7
27 7
reset ctr, 5 28 131 31 vi
3 from sw, 7 to ctr. 5 29 1174321 131
(Gy, + 3)x, - 0.75)x - 22)x, to ctr, 5; ctr. 5 = F(x) 30 31 7
F(x,,) to punch ctr, 31 ||31 753
initiate punching and wait until punching is completed 32 51
xy from ctr. 64 to punch ctr, for serial number 3317 753
1 in Ist machine column to punch ctr.; code for F(x) 34 || '743 753
initiate punching and continue operation 35 75
36 | 4187
Operating Instructions

(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)

Set switches as listed. Punch the values set in the switches and compare the punched values
with the list of switch settings.

The quantities punched under control of the main tape are the values of F(x,). Each card is to
be identified by a serial number consisting of the argument, Xn) punched in card columns 74-77
and a one, the code for F(x), in card column 80, All cards punched are to be placed in the
drawer provided for this purpose.

Run starting tape,

Run main control tape, If no failures occur, continue running until card for x, = 9.99 has been
punched, then press stop key.

If a failure occurs during the computation for the argument, x,» Troll the tape back to line 4,
marked "Rerun line", and repeat the computation for this value.

If tests are made and counters disturbed, or if it is desired to compute for any arbitrary value
of the argument, repeat the starting procedure with switches 9, 10 and 11 reset as listed,
296

(7)

(8)

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Since the maximum number of non-zero digits in any argument is three, the maximum time for

3
any multiplication is ten cycles, Hence, the maximum time for each revolution of the control

tape may be computed as follows:

accumulate arguments 3
three multiplications 30
punching of results 16

punching of serial number 3.
46 cycles = 13.8 seconds,

If further computations are added to this tape, it will be possible to interpose thirteen of these
cycles reducing the computation time to 9.9 seconds,

The first card punched under control of the maintape will be F(x) = 874.25 with the serial num-
ber 500001.

Plugging Instructions

(1)
(2)

Plug the multiply unit for the standard position of the operating decimal point (see page 247),

Plug the punch as shown in the diagram below.

PUNCH MAGNETS

5 10 15 20
e—e—_e—_0-_9_0_0_5 _0 6-0-8 __0-0-0-0—0 0-0-8

| 25 30 35 40
0000 jo000 9008000 9000

45 50 55 60
o0o0co0o CQa0o 00000 90000 0000

i>)

65 70 75

80
0000 0000 j9000 0 and hae

COMP MAG/OR CTR TOT EXIT OR MS IN

2A 2B 4A 4B 6A 6B
o-s-5-s oo 18-2 2 22 Se oan i

6B

| eye eee ® 0000060000 0000

Example 2, It is required to evaluate the polynomial of example 1 using difference engine techniques,

Suppose five values of the function, F 5? Fi “” F-3? F-2? Fou-v to be available in punched

ecards, A starting tape will be designed to feed these five cards, and compute the differences asso-

ciated with the argument x

n-1+ Switch 8 will contain a4F = 0,000 000 24 and this quantity will be used
297

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

to check the differences computed by the starting tape. Before beginning the computation with the
calculator, F(4.95), F(4.96), F(4.97), F(4.98) and F(4.99} must be computed manually and punched in
tabulating machine cards, Thereafter, F(x) must be punched in cards by the main control tape.
Hence, in the event of a machine error, any five successive values of the function, known to be cor-
rect, may be used to re-establish the computation with the aid of the starting tape.

The main control tape is to be designed so that the value of the function and its differences com-
puted in the m-1st revolution of the tape will be used in the mth revolution of the tape to compute the

next succeeding value of the function and its differences, The standard decimal position will be used.

Starting Tape Line |} OUT IN MISC.
reset ctr, 1 - 1 yl 1 7
F-5 to ctr. 1 from card feed I 2 1 7632
reset ctr. 2 3 2 2 7
Fi-4 to ctr, 2 from card feed I 4 2 7632
reset ctr. 3 5 21 21 7
F-3 to ctr, 3 from card feed I 6 21 7632
reset ctr. 4 7 43 3 1

F _9 to ctr, 4 from card feed I 8 3 7632
reset ctr, 8 9 4 4 7
Fel to ctr, 8 from card feed I 10 4 7632
reset ctr, 9 11 41 41 7
F,-; from ctr. 8 to ctr. 9 12 4 41 7

- F,_» from ctr, 4 to ctr. 9; ctr.9 =AF. 5 13 1/3 41 732
- F,_, from ctr. 3 to ctr. 4; ctr.4 =aF 14/21 3 732
- Fig from ctr, 2 to ctr. 3; ctr.3 =AF. 4 15 1/2 21 732
- F,_5 from ctr. 1 to ctr. 2; ctr,2 -aF. 16 41 2 732
reset ctr. 10 17 142 42 7

A F 2 from ctr. 9 to ctr, 10 18 |/41 42 7

298

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

_ 7 AF, _, from ctr, 4 to ctr. 10; ctr, 10 =a?F, 3

-~AF from ctr. 3 to ctr. 4; ctr.4 = A2F
n-4 n-4

-AF from ctr, 2 to ctr. 3; cir. 3 = A2F
n-5 n-5
reset ctr. 11

AF is from ctr. 10 to ctr. 11
~A2F from ctr. 4 to ctr. 11; ctr. 11 = A°'F
n-4 n-4

-aF__, from ctr, 3 to ctr. 4; ctr.4 =a3F_
reset ctr, 12
sip, from etr, 11 to etr. 12
-aA8 . - a4

ACF 5 from ctr. 4 to ctr, 12; ctr, 12 =a°F
reset comparison ctr, 5
atF from sw, 8 to ctr. 5

- atF from ctr. 12 to ctr. 5

n-5
reset check ctr, 72

zero check tolerance from sw. 4 to check ctr, 72

a‘ - a‘e to check ctr, 72

check; reset check cir, 72

reset ctr, 64

Ko from sw. 11 to ctr. 64; argument for punch card serial

~" number

Main Control Tane

reset working counters for differences computation

transfer differences from storage to working counters

Lan tan —_
F 1 ifom ctr, 8 ic ctr, 12

AF__» from ctr, 9 to ctr, 13

MISC,

Line | OUT IN

19 43 ‘j42 732
20 | 21 3 132
21 42 21 732
22 |} 421 421 7
23 «42 421 7
24 113 421 732
25 21 3 732
26 143 43 7
27 1424 43 7
28 43 43 732
29 {31 31 7
30 475 31 q
31 | 43 31 132
32 «74 74 7
33 4 743 14 7
34 [31 74 71
35 «774 74 64
3617 7 7
37 7521 7 7

1 443 43 7

2 431 431 7

3 432 432 7

4 (4321 4321 7

5 44 43 7

6 441 431 7

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

A2F , from ctr. 10 to ctr, 14
n-

a from ctr. 11toctr,15

a{F from sw. 8 to ctr, 15; ctr. 15 = oF

a[F from ctr, 15 to ctr. 14; ctr, 14 = a*F >

n-3

a°F from ctr, 14 to ctr, 13; ctr, 13 =aF
n-2 n-1

AF from ctr, 13 to ctr, 12; ctr, 12 = F
n-1 n

Fh from ctr, 12 to punch ctr.

reset ctr, 8; initiate punching; continue operation but complete
punching before reading into punch ctr,

reset ctr. 9

reset ctr. 10

reset ctr, 11

Ax from sw, 2 to ctr, 64; ctr. 64 = x jy TA% =X argument
for punch card serial number n

Fs from ctr, 12 to ctr. 8

‘Fi from ctr. 13 to ctr, 9

1
aK from ctr, 14 to ctr, 10

a°F__, from ctr, 15 to ctr. 11

a from ctr, 64 to punch ctr, for serial number

1 in Ist machine column to punch ctr.; code for F(x)

initiate punching and continue operation

Operating Instructions

299

Line jj OUT IN MISC.
7 {42 432 7
8 [1421 4321 17
—
9 |/"75 4321 7
10 4321 |432 7
11 432 431 7
12 |/431 43 7
13 [143 753 7
14 |I4 4 751
15/41 41 7
16 |/42 42 7
17 |/421 421 7
18 ||742 7
19 43 4 7
20 |1431 41 7
21 |/432 42 7
22 (4321 =| 421 7
23 ||/7 753
24 ||'743 753
25 75
26 87

(1) Set switches as listed on page 293, adding switch 8 = 0,000 000 24, Punch the values set in the
switches and compare the punched values with the list of switch settings,

(2) The quantities punched under control of the main tape are the values of F(x,). Each card is to

be identified by a serial number consisting of the argument, x

ny Punched in card columns 74-77

and a one, the code for F(x), in card column 80, All cards punched are to be placed in the

drawer provided for this purpose,

(3) Five cards, labeled "starting cards", must be placed in card feed 1, These cards are identified
by the serial numbers 495001, 496001, 497001, 498001 and 499001,
300

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Run starting tape. When cards

ats

¢
If the starting tape is com

tape.

an out, turn off card feed control switch and restart calculator.
co. he sequence mechanism will stop ona blank line of

ce

If the check, on line 35 of the starting tape fails, the calculator will stop on line 36, reading
(1,7, 7). The starting cards must be refed and the starting tape rerun, If the check continues
to fail, the counters used in the difference computation (etrs, 1 through 15) and switch 8 must
be tested.

Run main control tape, If no failures occur, continue running until the card for x, = 9.99 has
been punched, then press the stop key.

If it is necessary to rerun the computation, or to run it for an arbitrary value of the argu-
ment, x:
n

(a) five cards from those punched under control of the maintape musi be placed in card teed 1;
these cards are identified by the arguments xX,_5, Xy.4: Xp.3» %n-2? *n-19 in that order,
punched in card columns 74-77 and a one in cand-colimn 80: 3 n

(ob) switch 11 must be set to x,_4:

(c) the starting procedure must be repeated and the computation continued under control of the
main tape,

The maximum time for each revolution of the main tape may be computed as follows:

computation of F(x,) 12
punching F(x,) 10
punching serial number 3

35 cycles = 7.5 seconds.

The first card punched under control of the main sequence tape will be F(5,00) = 874,25 with
the serial number 500001.

Plugging Instructions
(1)
(2)

Plug the card punch as in example 1 (see page 296),

Plug card feed I direct (see page 272),

Example 3, It is required to design a single control tape incorporating the two methods of evaluating

the polynomial, F(x), defined in example 1, The two values of F(x,,) independently computed in each

revolution of the tape are to be compared providing an exact check on the computation, All other

conditions of this example are the same as those of examples 1 and 2,

Starting Tape

aie

s 1 through 35 will be Hines 1 through 35 of the starting tape of example 2,

Lines 36 through 41 will be lines 1 through 6 of the starting tape of example 1,
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Main Control Tape

Ax toctr.1; ctr.1 = Xp. tA =X,

Ax to ctr. 64; ctr. 64 = x +AK=K
n-1 n
Ax toctr, 2; ctr,2 =x, + 3

x, + 3 to MC Rerun line

Xn to MP

- 0.75 to ctr. 3

x, + 3)x, to ctr. 3

(x, + 3)x, - 0.75 to MC
Fh-1 to ctr, 12

A F-2 to ctr, 13

xy to MP

atF _, to ctr. 14

oF to ctr. 15

n-4

- 22 to ctr, 4

(x, + 3)x, - 0.75)x,, to ctr. 4

(x, + 3)x, - 0.75)x,, - 22 to MC

A4‘F to ctr, 15; ctr, 15 = ASF
n-4 n-3

A['F_, toctr. 14; ctr. 14 =a2F
n-3 n-2

Xn to MP

A2F_ . to ctr. 13; ctr, 13 =AF
n-2 n-

AF, _1 toctr. 12; ctr. 12 =F,

1

301

Line || OUT IN Misc,
1 |] 741 1 7
2 | 742 7 7
3 | 741 2 7
4 ||2 761 7
5 43 43 7
6 4 431 431
7 Wl 7
8 || 432 432 7
9 |}! 4321 4321 7

10 21 21 7

11 || 7431 21 32
12 21 7

13/21 761 7
14 «74 43 7

15 (| 41 431

16 41 1

17 (42 432 7

18 421 4321 7

19 43 3 7

20 17432 3 32
21 3 7

22 13 761 7
23 || 75 4321 7

24 |} 4321 432

25 41 7

26 |, 432 431 7

27 4431 43 7

302

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line | OUT | IN | MISC,

28 || 31 31 7
3 to etr.5 29 74321) {31
(G,, + 3x, - 0.75)x, - 22)x, to ctr, 5; ctr, 5 = Fi a 30 31 7
Fi to punch ctr, 31 (|/31 753

32 || 32 32 7
Fo by multiplication to ctr. 6 33) 31 32 q
- Fo by differences to ctr. 6 34 1143 32 732
zero check tolerance to check ctr,72 35 #743 74 U7
| ¥, - Fy to check ctr. 72 36 532 74 7
check 37 174 74 64
initiate punching;continue operation, but complete punching 38 «14 4 751

before reading into punch ctr.

39 41 41 7

40 ||42 42 7

41 |/421 421 7
F. to ctr. 8 42 443 4
AF 4 to ctr. 9 . 43 || 431 41 q
a*p _, to ctr. 10 44 432 427
Fs to ctr, 11 : 45 4321 421 7
x, for serial number to punch ctr, 46 {* 753
1 in ist machine column to punch ctr, — 47 4/743 753
initiate punching and continue operation 48 | 15

| 49 87

Operating Instructions

(1) Set switches as listed on page 293, adding switch 8 = 0,000 000 24, Punch the values set in the
switches and compare the punched values with the list of switch settings.

(2) The quantities punched under control of the main tape are the values of F(x,)- Each card is to
be identified by a serial number consisting of the argument, Xn punched in card columns 74-77
(3) Five cards, labeled "starting cards", must be placed in card feed I, These cards are identified
by the serial numbers 495001, 496001, 497001, 498001 and 499001,

(4) Run starting tape, When cards run out, turn off card feed control switch and restart calculator.
If the starting tape is completed correctly, the sequence mechanism will stop on a blank line of
tape,

(5) If the check, on line 35 of the starting tape fails, the calculator will stop on line 36, reading
(7, 7, 7), The starting cards must be refed and the starting tape rerun. If the check continues
to fail, the counters used in the difference computation (ctrs. 1 through 15) and switch 8 must
be tested,

(6) Run main control tape, If no failures occur, continue running until the card for F(9.99) has
been punched, then press the stop key. ;

(7) If the check on line 37 of the main tape fails, the tape must be rolled back to line 4, marked
"Rerun line", and the computation repeated,

(8) If the check continues to fail, the computation should be re-established using the following pro-
cedure for x,:

(a) five cards from those punched under control of the main tape must be placed in card feed I;
these cards are identified by the arguments x__-, X,_4, X,»_9) Xn_9; X,.1» in that order,
punched in card columns 74-77 and a one in card Sint 308 37 ne?

(b) switches 9, 10 and 11 must be set to the values indicated in the list on page 293;

(c) the starting procedure must be repeated and the computation continued under control of the
main tape,

(9) Repeated failure of the check under the roll back procedure of instruction (7) but correct oper-
ation under the procedure of instruction (8) probably indicates that the difference computation
is the source of error,

(10) Ifit is desired to run the computation for any arbitrary value of the argument, the procedure
of instruction (8) may be used,

(11) The maximum time for each revolution of the control tape may be computed as follows:

accumulate arguments 3
three multiplications 30
check procedure 6
punching F(x) 10
punching serial number 3
52 cycles = 15.6 seconds,

(12) The first card punched under control of the main sequence tape will be F(5.00) = 874.25 with
the serial number 500001,

Plugging Instructions

(1)

303

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

and a one, the code for F(x), in card column 80, All cards punched are to be placed in the
drawer provided for this purpose,

Plug the multiply unit for the standard position of the operating decimal point (see page 247).
304
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

(2) Plug the card punch as in example 1 (see page 296),

(3) Plug card feed I direct (see page 272).

Example 4, It is required that the function,
U(x) = (&? - 1)°3/?,

be tabulated in the interval 5<x<10, with ax = 0.01, using an iterative process, It is further re-
quired that the values of U(x) beinerrorbyless than 5 x 1071 and that the computation be completely
checked. The values of U(x) are to be punched in tabulating machine cards for use in further compu-
tation, Each card must be identified by a serial number consisting of the argument, x,, punched with
decimal point between card columns 75 and 76 (machine columns 5 and 6) and a two in card column 80
(2 in 1st machine column), It is not required to print the values of U(x), One value of U(x) is to be
computed during each revolution of the control tape. The tape is to be designed so that it may be
rolled back and rerun without any additional manipulations, The starting tape is to be designed so
that it may be used to re-establish the computation for any arbitrary value of the argument.

The value of U(x) = U(x, 4) = Ui determined for the argument, xj, will be used as the
first approximation to U(x,) = U,. The value of U,, will be obtained by the iterative formula,

_ 40,1, + Ny-1)
a) 2
Ura, + N-1) + 4N,

U
n

where KX, =Xp.y t+ 4%»

Naa = her
Ny = (x2 - 18

and v2 = 1/N,,.

The error after one application of the iterative formula is
e, = enn’? ps,

where &y = Ui-1 -U,-

It can be shown that one application of the iterative formula will give an error in U(x) of less than
2.7x 10711, slightly better than the accuracy required.

The computation of xt will be checked by use of the identity,
305
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

2 = x2
n

+2x_ JAX +x .
n-1 n-1

The computation of N, = (x2 - 1)° will be checked by comparing it with the value of

Tee 2 2

Nv= (x - 3) + 3)x, -1.
The quantities ULNn and N,U, will be computed and compared with each other. Finally, the value of
UL will be checked by means of the identity,

UENn =1,
The operating decimal point will be assumed to lie between columns 15 and 16 and division will be
plugged for 14 comparisons, The switch settings required by the starting tape and the main control

tape are given in the following table,

Switch Settings

No, Code Setting and Purpose
1 741 4x = 1 in 14th machine column; increment of argument for computing
2 | 742 4x = 1in 4th machine column; increment of argument for punch card serial
numbers
4 743 1 in lst machine column; zero check tolerance
7 74321 7 3
9 751 X,.1 = argument for computing; decimal point between columns 15 and 16;

used in starting tape only

11 7521 X,-1 = argument for punch card serial numbers; decimal point between col-
umns 5 and 6; used in starting tape only

12 | 753 Xx? = 1 in 12th machine column
13 7531 2 in Ist machine column; code for U(x)

14 7532 Xyj-24% = Xp_gQ with decimal point between columns 13 and 14; used in start-
ing tape only

15 75321 | 1

16 754 6 in 8th machine column; tolerance on check of Un
Starting Tape Line OUT IN MISC,
Xd to MC 1 ='751 761 q
2 1 1 7

306
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line | OUT IN MISC,
Xi-1 to ctr. i 3 7751 1
x,-1 to MP 4 {751 7
5 in 7 7
6 |/52 52 7
- 1 to ctr. 18 7 (175321 |52 732
8 |5 5
| x2_, toctr. 16 | 9 5 7
x2_, toctr, 18; ctr, 18 =x? _, -1 10 5 52 7
(x2_, - 1) to Mc 11 {52 761 =|"
“12~=«*(/"74 74 7
X,-1 to ctr. 64 13 75217
(x2_, - 1) to MP 14 |/52 1
15 51 51 1
X,-94x to ctr. 17 16 47532 51 7
17 "
1g {521 {521
(x2_, - 1)? to ctr. 19 19 521 7
(x2_1 - 1)2 to MC 20 |521 [761 = =|7
21 7
22
(x2_, - 1) to MP 23° |/52 7
24 7
25 7
26 [541 1541 {7
27 [53 53
(x, - 1) to ctr, 20; ctr. 20=N, | 28 ek
U,.1 to ctr, 25 from card feed I ; 29 541 7632

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

U,-1 to MC

U,_1N,-1 to ctr. 26

Main Control Tape

Ax toctr, 1; ctr,1 = Xp t 4% = x,

4x to ctr, 64; ctr. 64 =x) + Ax = xy

—2 2.

Ax” toctr. 17; ctr, 17 = x, pax + Ax* =x 14*

x, to MC

2
X,.1 toctr.4
x_ to MP

n

Xp.14X to ctr, 4
- 1 to ctr, 18

2
Xn to ctr. 3
2
xh to ctr, 18
(x2 - 1) to MC
Xn-14X to ctr, 4

ax to ctr. 4; ctr, 4 = x

Rerun line

307

[ bine OUT IN MISC,
30 4541 761 7
31
32
33] 53 7
34 7
35 7
36 7
37 «542 542
38 542 1

—S— ht

1 741 1 7
2 || T42 7 7
3 |] 753 51 7
ahh 761 7
5 43 3 7
6 5 3

7 1 7
8 51 3 7
9 152 52 7
10 11'75321 152 732
11/21 21
12 21 7
13° 21 52 7
14 1/52 761 7
15 |/51 3 7
16 (/'753 3

308

2
(x, - 1) to MP

2
Xn to ctr. 6

- 2 to ctr. 6

(x2 - 1? to etr. 19

(x2 - 1)? to MC

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

zero check tolerance to check ctr. 72

(x2 - 1) to MP

- 3 to ctr, 21

x2 to ctr, 21
n

x to MP

3 to ctr. 22
12 -#| to check ctr, 72
I*n “nl

check

2
(2 - 3)x2 to ctr. 22

2. 2
(xn 3) x5 + 3 to MC

Line 7 OUT IN MISC.
17 || 52 7
18 || 32 32 7
19 [21 32 vi
20 [3 32 132
21 1521 521
22 521 q
23 4/521 761 7
24 4743 74 7
25
26 152 7
27 1531 531 7
28 |\'74321 [531 732
29 21 531 7
36 4/53 53
31 53 7
32 531 761 7
33 q
34 7/532 532
35 21 7
36 174321 1532 7
37 432 74 71
38 (74 74 64
39 532
40 532 7
41 ||532 761 7
42 q

43

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

x2 to MP

- 1 to ctr, 23
(2 - 3)x2 + 3) x2 to ctr, 23; ctr, 23 = N,

U,-1 to MC

U,-1Np-1 to ctr. 27

N_ to MP
n

Ni to ctr, 4

N,, to ctr. 4

N,, to ctr. 4

Un Ni to ctr, 27
U1, + No -v to MC

N, to ctr, 4; ctr. 4 = 4N,

UN, +N.) toMP

U,_1(N, + N)_y) to ctr. 5

UL, + N,-1) to ctr. 5

U-1 (N, + N,-1) to ctr. 5

U,-1%, + Ny_y) to ctr. 5; ctr. 5 = 4U,_,(N, + Nh _y)
U2 (N, +N,-1) to ctr. 4

2 2
Un-10N, + Nap” +4N, to DR

309

Line || OUT IN MISC,
44 || 21 ui
45 q
46 7
47 || 5321 5321 7
48 ||75321 |5321 32
49 5321 vi
50 || 541 761 7
51 5421 5421 7
52 || 542 5421
53 153 7
54 3 3 7
55 || 53 3 7
56 1153 3 7
57 153 3
58 5421 q
59 || 5421 761 7
60 || 53 3 q
61 || 31 31
62 || 5421 7
63 || 5421 31 7
64 | 5421 31 vi
65 | 5421 31 7
66 5421 31
67 3 7
68 113 76 7
69 || 321 321 q
70 |

310
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

40, + Nv to DD

N_ to cir.6
n
-N_ toctr.6
n
zero check to’erance to check ctr, 72
-|N -N | 20 check etr, 72
n nl

check

UL to ctr. 7
UL to MC
N_ to MP

n

ULN, to ctr, 12

N_ to MC
n

Line | OUT IN MISC.
71 431 7
72 7
73 7
74 q
"5 q
76 7
77 7
78 7
79 132 32 7
80 || 53 32 7
81 | 5321 32 732
82 9743 74 7
83 #32 74 71
84 574 74 64
85 321
86 321 7
87 321 761 7
88 1
89
90 || 53 7
91 7
92 q
93 7
94 4 43 43
95 43
96 153 761 7
97 7

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

U_ to MP
n

- 1 toctr, 14
U_N_ to ctr. 6
non

N U_ toctr, 13
nn
U_ to MC
n
-N U_ toctr.6 -
nn
zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72

U_N_ toMP
non

-|U,N, - N,U,! to check ctr, 72
_ check
U2N_ to ctr. 14; ctr. 14 = U2N. -1
non enue . ~ “nn
tolerance on UL to check ctr, 72
-|v2n,, -1 | to check ctr, 72
check
UL to punch ctr.
initiate punching
2

x* to ctr, 16
n

U_ toctr, 25
n

U,N, to ctr. 26

i for serial number to punch etr,

311

Line] out | in | Misc.
98 |l432 —|fa32
99 || 321 7
100 ||75321 |432 =| 732
101 ||32 32 7
102 ||43 32 7
103 431 [431
104 4317
105 321 |7e1. [7
106 431 —|32 732
107 [743 | 74
108 ||43 7
109 7
110 [32 74 71
ui Iv 74 64
112 432
113 432 «|
114 [754 |ra 7 |
115 [432 [74 1M
6 [74 74 64
—
117 |l321 [753
118 |I5 5 751
119 |/21 5 7
120 |1541 |541—| 7
121 |[321 [541s 7
122 |\542 |5s42 In
123 [143 542
124 {7 153

312

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line || OUT IN MISC.
2 in lst machine column to punch etr.; code for U(x) 125 || 7531 753
initiate punching and continue operation 126 75

127 87
Operating Instructions

(1) Set switches as listed onpage 305. Punch the values set in the switches and compare the punched
values with the list of switch settings,

(2) The quantities punched under control of the main tape are the values of U(x.). Each card is
identified by a serial number consisting of the argument, x,, punched in card columns 74-77
and a two, the code for U(x), in card column 80, All cards punched are to be placed in the
drawer vrovided for thi purpose,

SA pe Veet 20a SES PUL pO

(3) One card labeled, "starting card", followed by a blank card, must be placed in card feed I, This
card is identified by the serial number 499002, ;

(4) Run starting tape. When cards run out, turn off card feed control switch and restart calculator,
When the starting tape is completed, the sequence mechanism will stop on a blank line of tape.

(5) Run main control tape. If no failures occur, continue running until the card for U(9.99) has
been punched, then press stop key.

(6) If any of the checks in the main tape fail, the tape must be rolled back to line 4, marked "Rerun
line", and the computation repeated.

(7) The following checks are included in the main control tape.

Lines Quantity Checked Tolerance
24, 37-38 x - x from ctr. 6 1 in Ist machine column from sw, 4
82-84 N, - Ni from ctr. 6 1 in Ist machine column from sw, 4
107, 110-111 UN, - NU, from ctr. € 1 in ist machine column from sw. 4
114-116 v2 N, - 1 from ctr, 14 6 in 8th machine column from sw, 16

(8) If a check repeatedly fails, the quantities involved in the computation being checked should be
punched in cards, and manual computations used to assist in tracing the source of error,

(9) Ifitis desired to run the computation for any arbitrary value of the argument, x_, or to re-
establish operation after tests have been made and counters disturbed, the following steps must
be taken:

(a) a card from those punched under control of the main tape, followed by a blankcard must be
placed in card feed 1; this card is identified by the argument, X,-1» Punched in card eol-
umns 74-77 and a two in card column 80; care musi be taken to replace this card properly
after it is used;
313
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES
(b) switches 9, 11 and 14 must be set to the values indicated in the switch list on page 305;
(c) the starting procedure must be repeated and the computation continued under control of the

main tape,

(10) The maximum time for each revolution of the control tape may be computed as follows:

accumulate arguments . 3
additions 5
multiplication by Xn 10
4 multiplications by x and x2 - 1 48
2 multiplications by Ny 36
multiplication by U, 15
multiplication by Un_y(Ny + Ny_4) 18
division to 14 comparisons 34
multiplication by U,N, 18
punching U(x) 10
punching serial number 3

200 cycles = 60 seconds,
Plugging Instructions
(1) Plug the multiply unit for the standard position of the operating decimal point (see page 24'7),
(2) Plug the divide unit for 14 comparisons using the blank code as shown in the following diagram,

MP-DIV PLUGBOARD

Row 1 tooo 00000 obooo 00000 00000
25 20 15 10 5
Set divide switch to 07.
(3) Plug the card punch as in example 1 (see page 296),

(4) Plug card feed I direct (see page 272),

Example 5, The output cards containing F(x) and U(x) as obtained in examples 3 and 4 are to be fed
to the calculator to form the function,
f(x) = F(x) - U(x).

It is required that a two column table be printed consisting of the argument, x,, followed by the
values of f(x). The values of i(x,) are to be printed to six decimal places, the digits being grouped
by threes to the right and left of the decimal point, The lines of the table are to be spaced in vertical
groups of five lines, The quantities F(x) - U(x) and U(x) . F(x) are to be computed and compared
with each other. The print counter read-out is to be checked, It will not be required to punch the

values of f(x) in tabulating machine cards, This could be done, however, without loss of time,
314

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Starting Tape

Xn-l to ctr, 1

Main Control Tape

Ax toctr.1; ctr,.1 =x,4+Ax =,
Xp to print ctr.I

initiate printing

F(x) to ctr. 35 from card feed I
U(x) to ctr, 36 from card feed I

F(x) to MC Rerun line

U(x) to MP

zero check tolerance to check ctr. 72

f(x) = F(x) U(x) to ctr, 37
U(x) to MC

reset print ctr. I

F(x) to MP
f(x) to print ctr. I
f(x) from print ctr. I to etr, 39

- f(x) from ctr, 37 to ctr, 39

Line |} OUT IN MISC,
1 ijt 1 7
2 W751 1 7
1 || 741 1
2 (1 7432
3 487 752 76
4 621 621 7
5 63 63 7
6 621 7632
7 63 76321
8 ||621 761 7
9 |/631 631 7
10 4, 632 632
11 163 7
12 632i 6321 7
13°74 74 7
14 9743 74 7
15, 64 64
16 631
17 1/63 761 7
18 || 842 7
19
20 4621 q
21 =||631 7432
22 || 862 6321 7
23 (|| 631 6321 132

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

f(x) to ctr. 40
-|f(x) - £(x)| to check ctr. 72

check of print ctr. I read-out

f(x) = U(x) F(x) to ctr, 38

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72
- f(x) to ctr. 40

- | £¢x) - f(x) | to check ctr, 72

check multiplication

initiate printing

Operating Instructions

315

Line || OUT IN MISC,
24 1 631 64 7
25 6321 74 71
26 474 74 64
27 632
28 632 7
29 9743 74 7
30 || 632 64 732
31 964 74 vel
32 474 74 64
33 752 76
34 87

(1) | Set switches as listed, Punch the values set in the switches and compare the punched values

with the list of switch settings,

Switch Settings

No. Code Setting and Purpose
1 | 741 Ax = 1 in 14th machine column; increment of argument for printing
4 743 1 in ist machine column; zero check tolerance
9 751 X17 argument for printing; decimal point between columns 15 and 16;
used in starting tape only

(2) Card feed I must contain the cards for F(x), identified by the code 1 in the 80th card column,
Card feed II must contain the cards for U(x), identified by the code 2 in the 80th card column,
Care must be taken that the cards in each feed contain identical serial numbers in card col-
umns 74-77, One card is fed from each feed during each revolution of the control tape. The
first cards fed must contain the serial numbers 500001 and 500002 for card feeds I and II,

respectively.

(3) Run starting tape. When the starting tape is completed, the sequence mechanism will stand on

a blank line of tape.

(4) Start maincontrol tape, The sequence mechanism will stop on line 2, Press start key and con-
tinue operation, If no failures occur, continue running until the argument 10,00 has been print-

ed, then press stop key,
316

(6) .

(7)

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

B mS

the check on line 26 fails, the print counter read-out should be tested, If the storage counters

ee a te 4 tha tann mas than ha wn 3 i
e not disturbed, the tape may then be rolled back to line 8 and the computation repeated.

If the check on line 32 fails, the multiply unit should be tested, If the storage counters are not
disturbed, the tape may then be rolled back to line 8 and the computation repeated,

lf storage counters have been disturbed by testing, the computation must be re-established
using the following procedure for the argument, x)! ‘

(a) card feed I must contain the cards for F(x), (code 1 in the 80th card column), the first
card containing the serial number in card columns 74-77;

(b) card feed II must contain the cards Yor U(x), (code 2 in the 80th card column), the first

, card containing the serial number x, in card columns 74-77;

(c) switch 9 must be set to x, _,, the value indicated in the switch list;

(d) the starting procedure must be repeated and the computation continued under control of the
main tape;

(e) the typewriter vertical spacing must be checked and properly reset,

The maximum time for each revolution of the control tape may be computed as follows:

print argument 14
multiplication by U(x) 15
check f(x) 4
print f(x) 14

47 cycles = 14.1 seconds,

Plugging Instructions

(1)
(2)
(3)

Row

Row

H
P

Row

Row

Row18 090000 00000 00000 00000 000

Plug the multiply unit for the standard position of the operating decimai point (see page 247),
Plug the card feeds direct (see page 272).
Plug typewriter I as shown in the diagram below.

DP TAB ; FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD
1 @60000 0e-4 rT e e e,;e | TYPEWRITER I

1 5 5 (10 T 15
R TAB }
o 00 oo oOo

o ofo | COL-SEL

2 0006 @ 0 0 oOfjjo o re)
t (oo HES °f 30 35
SPACES f
$3 00006 ooo ao vllocao Jb ao alslos oG 6 Gj5
40 45
4 oebeoe —2 oe ole S —@ 0000 00 0 0Jo | PRINT CTR RO
24 20 15 T’ [io 5
c
5 e#000 000 © 00000 00000 00000 | RO-RELS
2524 20 | 15 10 5

6 bo000 00000 00000 00000 00000
25 24 20 15 10 5

moO
“ft
317

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row38 00000 00000 00000 0000 00000
98765 43211098 76 5] 43 21 10

Row39 00000 00000 00000 0000 00000
R

aw

Example 6, It is required that a single main control tape be designed to compute,
f(x) = F(x) - U(x),

as defined in example 5, It is further required that the values of f(x) be in error by less than 5x 10-11
and that the computation be completely checked, The values of f(x) are to be punched in tabulating
machine cards for use in further computation, Each card must be identified by a serial number con-
sisting of the argument, Ky punched with decimal point between card columns 75 and 76 and a three
in the 80th cardcolumn, It is not required to print the values of f(x), One value of f(x) is to be com-
puted during each revolution of the control tape, The tape is to be designed so that it may be rolled
back and rerun without any additional manipulations, The starting tape is to be designed so that it
may be used to re-establish operation for any arbitrary value of the argument,

Since F(x)<2x 104, U(x) must be in error by less than 2.5 x 10715, in order that f(x) be cor-
rect to the required accuracy. Two applications of the iterative process will be necessary to provide
the desired accuracy in U(x).

In order to provide for rerunning and re-establishing the computation, it will be necessary to
punch cards containing F(x) and U(x) during each revolution of the tape. Thus the main control tape
will combine the tapes of examples 3, 4 and 5, The starting tape will combine the essential features
of the starting tapes of these examples, The interweaving of the coding of these tapes is left as a
problem for the reader,

The computation as performed by the three separate tapes would require:

computation of F(x) 15.6
computation of U(x)
(including two iterations) 86,4
computation of f(x) 14,1
Ti6-1 seconds,

The computation as performed by a single control tape should not require more than 98 seconds,
318

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Exampie 7, Let it be assumed that the function, f(x) (defined in example 5), has been computed with
anerror of less than 4x 10-10, over the interval 4,99 <x < 10.02, with Ax = 0,01, and punched in
tabulating machine cards, The cards have been punched with serial numbers, equal to Ky with deci-

mal point between card columns 22 and 23, It is now required to compute, check and print the values

of the integral, tx) LO Jax
x) = x)dx,

over the interval 5 <x <10. It is further required that a two column table be printed consisting of
the argument, x,, followed by the values of I(x,). The lines of the table are to be spaced in vertical
groups of five lines. .

The approximate quadrature formulae,

*n
al “f | foxddx = (fy + 8fn + 5f,,1)4x/12 + R,

al f ‘ f(xydx = (5f, + 8f,,1 - fy49) 4/12 - R,

where R = Ax! £"( & )/24,

in the interval 4,99 < + 10,02, may be used since for the given f(x), R < 6.66 x 107!!, Hence the
error in the integral I(10) will be less than 3.4.x 10-8, The values of I(x) will be printed to eight
decimal places, with a half-correction in the ninth place, making the tabular values in error by less
than 4x 10-8, The digits will be grouped by fours to the right and left of the decimal point, Each
revolution of the main control tape will compute and compare the quantities aI and Al, The values
of Al will be used to accumulate the values of I(x), The serial numbers of the cards supplying f(x)
will be checked, The print counter read-out and the half-correction will be checked before the tabular
values are printed on typewriter Il, Typewriter I will print the argument, the value of the integral
and the difference, AI - Al, before the checks are completed in order to provide information in case
of machine failure, In order to provide for rerunning and re-establishing the computation, if neces-

sary, the values of I(x) will be punched in tabulating machine cards. The values set in the switches

are listed under the operating instructions.

Starting Tape Line || OUT IN MISC,

-_=

1 1 "

x,.1 toctr. 1 2 751 | 7

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

f +X to ctr. 2 from card feed I
n-1 n-1

+X to SIO ctr.
-1 n-1

f to ctr. 16
n-1

X,-1 to ctr. 3

Xn-1 to ctr, 64

- X,_1 to ctr. 3

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72
-|%,-1+ X,-1 | to check ctr, 72

check

fh + x, to ctr. 2 from card feed I

fh + Xn to SIO ctr.
fh to ctr, 17

x. to ctr, 3
n
~ X,-1 to ctr.3
~ 1 in Ist machine column to ctr, 3
zero Check tolerance to check ctr, 72
Xy 7 3y-1 7 1| to check ctr. 72
check

f. to MC
fl

319

Line || OUT IN MISC,
3/2 2 7321
4 2 7632
5 2 874 7
6 45 5 7
7 1874 5 7
8 421 21 7
9 84 21 7

10 47 7 7

11} 7521 7 7

12 ||" 21 732
13 «|| 74 74 7

14 9743 74 7

15 21 74 71
16 474 74 64
17 2 2 7321
18 2 7632
19 1/2 874 7

20 |/51 51 7

21) 4874 51 7
22 21 21 7

23 4/84 21 7
24:7 ai 732
25 11743 21 732
26 §'743 74 7
27 §21 74 71
28 «4'74 74 64
29 51 761 7

320

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

f_ toctr.5

n

5 to MP

fh to ctr. 5; ctr. 5 = tn

f£. to ctr. 5; ctr.5 = 3f
n n

fh to ctr, 5; ctr. 5 = 4f,

5f, to ctr, 4

f. toctr. 5; ctr.5 = 5f
fi n

of, to ctr, 6

- 5f a to ctr, 6

zero check tolerance to check ctr. 72
- a - a to check ctr. 72

check

Sf, to ctr. 18

fh to MC
fh to ctr. 5; etr.5 = bi,
fa to ctr, 5; ctr. 5 = fi,

8 to MP

fa to ctr, 5; ctr. 5 = Sf,

8f_ to ctr. 6
n

Sf, to ctr. 4

- 3 a to ctr. 6

Line | OUT IN MISC,
30 431 31 7
31 151 31
32 (7541 7
33 | 51 31 7
34 || 51 31 7
35 {| 51 31 q
36 3 3
37 3 q
F <<
38 || 51 31 7
39 || 32 32 7
40 | 31 32 7
41 13 32 732
42 | 743 74 7
43 332 74 41
44 974 74 64
45 || 52 52 7
46 43 52 7
47 51 761 7 a
48 451 31 a
49 451 31
50 || 7542 7
51 }}51 31 7
52 32 32 7
53 |) 31 32 7
54 13 3
55 3 7
56 13 32 732

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72
- | 8, - 8f, | to check ctr, 72

check
Sf, to ctr, 19

fh ait Xl to ctr, 2 from card feed I

fal +k to SIO counter

fad to ctr. 20

x to ctr. 3
n+1

- 34 to ctr, 3

- 1 in Ist machine column to ctr, 3

- 1 in 1st machine column to ctr, 3
zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72

Xa 7 Xt - 1-1] to check ctr, 72

check

I(x,.1) + X,.1 to ctr. 2 from card feed II

I(x,_4) + Xn-1 to SIO counter
I(x,_1) to ctr, 21

Xnel to ctr, 3

- En.4 to ctr. 3

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72

321

Line | OUT | IN | MISC,
57 1743 74 7

58 | 32 14 71
59 | 74 74 64
60 ||521 521 7

61 {13 521 7

62 |12 2 7321
63 2 7632
64 |l2 874 7

65 [153 53 7

66 i874 53 7

67 |l24 21 7

68 |/84 21 7

69 ||" 21 732
70 743 ~~ l21 732
m1 (1743 [21 732
72 $743 = | 74 7

73 | 21 74 71
74 174 74 64
75 |2 2 7321
76 2 76321
TT 2 8747

78 (531 (531 7

79 (874 1531 7

80 |21 21 7

81 | 84 21 1

82 7 21 732
83 | 743 14 7

322

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

x to check ctr, 72

*-1 7 2n-1

check

~ Xi y to ctr, 2-
Xn-1 to LIO ctr.
—n-

x, toctr.2

n-1

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72

“| Xn-1

check

+X to check ctr. 72
=n-1

Main Control Tape

Ax toctr.1; ctr, 1 =x,_1+4x =x,
x, to print ctr, I
print with argument control
Rerun line I
£42 + Xpagq to ctr. 15 from card feed I

fh +1 to MC Rerun line II

- £1 to ctr. 6
5 to MP

Sf, to ctr. 6

5f . toctr.4
n+i

x, to print ctr, II

Line || OUT IN | MISC.
84 fi 74 71
85 [74 74 64
86 |i2 2 763
87 iit 2 732
88 7 765421 |7
89 |/831 2 7
90 4743 74 7
91 [2 74 71
92 [74 74 64

= == =
93 7
1 {741 1 7
2 Ht 7432
3 487 752 76
4 {4321 [4321 [17
5 4321 | 7632
6 153 761 7
7 4/32 32 7
8 IS 32 32
9 [frs41 7
10 521 32 7
11 |/432 432 7
12 |/321 321 7
13 |/3 3
14 3
15 fi 74321

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES -

print with argument control
fh 41 to MC

Stel to ctr. 6

5f, to ctr, 7

8 to MP

fa + ke to SIO ctr,

f

nad to ctr. 3

8f to ctr. 5
n+1
- 1 in ist machine column to ctr, 14
(- f,-1 + 8f, + 5f,,1) to MC
fl to ctr, 7
- taa2 to ctr, 7
Ax/12 to MP

- 1 in Ist machine column to ctr, 14

X42 to ctr. 14

4x to ctr, 64; ctr, 64 = Xn-1 + 4X = Xn

-X, to ctr, 14

zero check tolerance to check ctr, 72
Iq, _4) to ctr, 11
A I(x,) to ctr. 8

Al(x,) to ctr, 11; etr.11 = I(x.)

I(x,) to print ctr, I

323

Line | OUT IN MISC,
16 87 7521 =|7
17 1153 761 7
18 |/3 32 7
19 1/52 321
20 || 7542 7321
21 {4321 | 874 7
22 |/21 2a. {7
23 |1874 21 7
24 [31 31
25 31 7
—— ——
26 1743 432 732
27. 132 761 7 =
28 |131 321 7
29 |/21 321 32
30 ||'75421 7
31 |}743 432 732
32 |/84 432 7
33 | 742 1 7
34 |i7 432 732
35 9743 14 7
36 [421 421 7
37 1531 421 7
38 [4 4
39 4 7
— |
40 |4 421 7
41 f 421 7432
42 152 76

324

(5f, + Bat - fo) to MC

1

4x/12 to MP

I(x _) to ctr, 12
n-1

I(x_) to ctr, 13
n

Al) io cir. id

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

~|Xx 9-En 72-1 to check ctr, 72

n+.

check

Al to ctr. 9

- Al to ctr, 10

Al - At to print etr.I

print

tolerance on AI to check ctr, 72
-| Al-Al | to check ctr, 72
check

AI to ctr, 12; ctr. 12 = I(x,)

Ix) to ctr. 2

- I,) to ctr, 2

tolerance on AI to check ctr, 72
-| I(x,) - Ifx,) | to check ctr. 72

check

Line 7 OUT IN MISC.

43 |) 321 761 7

44 1141 41 7

45 |) 43 43

46 || 75421 7

47 1531 43 7

48 {1431 431 7

49 421 431 7

50 | 42 42 7

5i 44 42 7

52 9432 74 71

53 974 74 64

54 41

55 41 7

56 (41 42 32

57 442 7432

58 752 7

59 57543 714 7

60 942 74 71

61 474 74 64 __|

62 | 41 43 7

63 2 2 7

64 4/421 2 7

65 143 2 732
<==

66 97543 14 7

67 42 74 71

6g E74 74 64

=
69 1/5 5 q

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

fh to ctr. 16

f to ctr, 17
ntl

Stat to ctr, 18
2 a] to ctr, 19

fad to ctr. 20
Iq,) to ctr, 21
reset print ctr. II
I(x,) to print ctr, II

half-correction to print ctr, II

I(x,) + half-correction to ctr, 2

- half-correction to ctr, 2

- I,) to ctr, 2

zero check tolerance to check cir, 72

- | I(x,) + half-correction - half-correction - I(x,) | to check
ctr, 72

check

print

I(x,) to SIO ctr.
xh to ctr. 3
I(x,) to ctr. 3

I(x.) + a to punch ctr,

325

Line ouT IN MISC.
70 || 51 5 7
m1 °«( 51 51 7
72 ||/53 51 7
73 || 52 52 7
74 113 52 7
75 1521 521 7
76 || 31 521 7
77 1153 53 7
78 (|| 21 53 7
79 11531 531 7
80 || 421 531 7
81 || 8421 7
82 #421 74321
83 175431 | 74321
84 {12 2 7
85 (8621 {2 ”
86 175431 |2 732
87 | 421 2 732
88 1743 74 7
89 2 74 71
90 474 74 64
91 7521 | 76
92 || 21 21 7321
93 |] 421 874 7
94 617 21 7
95 || 874 21 7
96 || 21 753

326
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line | OUT IN MISC,
punch o7 5
1 in Ist machine column to ctr, 71 98 || 743 7321 7
tolerance for end of page stop to check ctr. 72 99 57421 74 q
- number of lines to check ctr, 72 100 }7321 (74s | 71
check 101 |'74 74 64
102 7
103 87

Operating Instructions

(1) Set switches as listed in the following table. The operating decimal point lies between columns
: 16 and 17, Punch the values set in the switches and compare the punched values with the list of
switch settings.

Switch Settings

No. | Code Setting and Purpose
1 741 Ax = 1 in 15th machine column; increment of argument for printing ~~
2 742 &x = 1 in Ist machine column; increment of argument for punch card serial
numbers

3 1421 5 in 2nd machine column
4 743 1 in ist machine column; zero check tolerance

9 751 x

n-1 = argument for printing; decimal point between columns 16 and 17; used

in starting tape only

li 7521 X41 = argument for punch card serial numbers; decimal point between col-
umns 2 and 3; used in starting tape only

17 7541 5
18 7542 8
19 75421 | 0.0008 3333 3333 =ax/12

20 17543 tolerance on check of AI; 1 in 7th machine column, 4 in 6th machine column
21 75431 5 in 8th machine column; half-correction

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

327

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

The "85-1 PU," switch and the "SIO-OUT-2 Invert Control" switch must be in the off position
before running any part of this computation, (see page 139).

The values punched under control of the main tape are the values of I(x,). Each card is identi-
fied by a serial number, x,, punched with decimal point between card columns 22 and 23. All
cards punched are to be placed in the drawer provided for this purpose.

Card feed I must contain the cards for f(x), When starting, the first card fed must contain the
Serial number 0499 in card columns 1-4, When rerunning for the argument, xy, the first card
fed must contain the serial number, -1, in cardcolumns 1-4, Three cards are fed under con-
trol of the starting tape, and one card during each revolution of the main tape. The card fed
during the revolution of the control tape for X, has the serial number Xni2°

Card feed II is used only when starting and rerunning, When starting the computation, card feed
1! must contain a starting card and a blank card, When rerunning for the argument, Xp; the
card with serial number xp-1, previously punched by the main control tape, followed by a blank
card must be placed in card feed I, Care must be taken to replace this card properly after it
is used.

Run starting tape, When cards run out in card feed II, turn off card feed control switch and
restart calculator, When the starting tape is completed correctly, the sequence mechanism will
stop on a blank line of tape,

The checks in the starting tape are listed in the following table,

Lines

Quantity Checked

Tolerance

14-16
26-28
42-44

57-59

12-74
83-85
90-92

serial number of 1st card from feed I
serial number of 2nd card from feed I

5f,, computed by multiplication and by
addition

Bt, computed by multiplication and by
addition

serial number of 3rd card from feed I
serial number of card from feed II

argument for printing

in lst machine column from switch 4
in 1st machine column from switch 4

in ist machine column from switch 4

in 1st machine column from switch 4

in lst machine column from switch 4
in ist machine column from switch 4

in Ist machine column from switch 4

(8)

(9)

(10)

If the sequence mechanism stops on lines 17, 29, or 75 of the starting tape, the wrong cards
have been fed from card feed I, and the starting tape should be rerun, with the cards corrected.

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 86 of the starting tape, the wrong card has been fed
from card feed II, and the starting tape should be rerun, with the cards corrected,

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 45 or 60 of the starting tape, the failure is probably in
the multiply unit or in counter 5, The starting tape must be rerun with the cards replaced in
both feeds,
328

(11)

(12)

(13)

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

If the sequence mechanism stops on the check on line 93 of the starting tape (blank, blank, 7),
switches 9 and 11 and counters 1, 2, 64 and SIO should be tested since this check compares the
argument for printing with the argument for the punch card seriai numbers,

Run main control tape until the "end of page stop" check stops the machine after 50 lines have
been printed, Reset counter 71, start new page on typewriter II and space up typewriter I, if
no failures occur, continue running until cards run out in card feed I, turn off card feed control
switch, restart calculator and press stop key.

The checks in the main control tape are listed in the following table.

Lines Quantity Checked Tolerance

35, 52-53 |serial number of card feed I 1 in Ist machine column from switch 4

59-61 |AI computed two ways i in 7th machine column, 4 in 6th ma-
66-68 | accumulation of I(x)

88-90 | print counter IT read-out and half-correction 1 in 1st machine column from switch 4

chine column from switch 20

i

in 7th machine column, 4 in 6th ma-
chine column from switch 20

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 54 of the main control tape, while computing for the
argument, xy the wrong card has been fed from card feed I, The cards in card feed I must be
checked and replaced, the card withserial number X,,9 being the first card fed. The main con-
trol tape must be rolled back to line 4, marked "Rerun line I", and the computation repeated,
Typewriter I must be spaced up, and its vertical spacing checked as the computation proceeds,

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 62 of the main control tape, the tape must be rolled
back to line 6, marked "Rerun line Il", and the compuiation repeated, Typewriter I must be
spaced up, and its vertical spacing checked as the computation proceeds. Typewriter II must be
turned off and kept off until after that line in the tape (line 30) at which the argument has fin-
ished printing, It must then be turned on in order to print the correct value of the function.

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 69 of the main control tape, the addition of AI to I has
failed, and the counters involved should be tested, If the quantities in the counters are not dis-
turbed, the tape may be rolled back and rerun as in instruction (15).

If the sequence mechanism stops on line 91 of the main control tape, either the print counter
read-out or the haif-correction has failed, and the counters involved should be tested, If the
quantities in the counters are not disturbed, the tape may be rolled back and rerun as in in-
struction (15).

If counters are disturbed in testing and it is necessary to re-establish the computation for the
argument, x,, the following procedure must be carried out:

(a) switches 9 and 11 must be set to x,_1 aS indicated in the switch list on page 326;

(b) ecard feed I must contain the cards for f(x), the first card containing the serial number x)_1;

(c) card feed II must contain the card with serial number x,_;, from among those previously
punched by the main control tape, followed by a blank card; care must be taken to replace
the functional card properly after it is used;

(a) run the starting tape; when the cards run out incard feed II turnoff card feed control switch
and restart calculator;
' 329
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES
(e) run the main control tape starting on the "start line", and continue the computation;

(f}) typewriter I must be spaced up and its spacing checked as the computation is continued;
(g) typewriter II must be turned off and kept off until just before the correct function is printed,

(19) The maximum time for one revolution of the main control tape may be computed as follows:

3 prints on typewriter I 48
2 prints on typewriter II 28
cycles not covered by printing 13
88 cycles = 26.4 seconds,

Plugging Instructions

(1)

(2)

(3)

The multiply unit must be plugged for operating decimal point between columns 16 and 17, with
the plugging to the four lowest columns of the buss omitted as shown in the following diagram.

: MP-DIV PLUGBOARD
Row 2 ee-#e0e 00000 00000 00000 00000 PQCTR
25 20 15 10 5

Row 3 o 000 00000 0O ee-e—-e—e—-e—0—¢—0—o-0—0—e—-@ | PQCTR
46 45 40 35 30
15 10

e—-e-4+-e—0 0000 P-OUT
5

Row 4 o
24 20

The LIO counter must be plugged to read columns 1-4 of LIO to columns 15-18 of the buss as
shown in the following diagram,

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD
Row25 00000 00 @#,@—@0000 00000 0090000. BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

Row26 00000 00000 00000 00000 0 eelee LIO-OUT
24 21 20 15 10 5

The SIO counter must be plugged so that:

(a) SIO-OUT I reads columns 5-24 of SIO to columns 5-24 of the buss;
(b) SIO-OUT II reads columns 1-4 of SIO to columns 1-4 of the buss;

as shown in the following diagram,
FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

Row 34 0 e-e—e—e—e-0—e—0—0-—,_8-_0-_0_0-_0-_0_0-0_0@—_8 0 000 BUSS
24 20 15 10 5

Row 35 0 @—e—e—e—e-e—-e—-e—e—o—s—_s—0—_0-—_0_0_0--0-@—8@ 000 0 £xSIO-OUTI
24 20 15 10 5

Row36 00000 00000 00000 00000 0 @-e—@ SIO-OUT II
24 20 15 10 5

Row37 00000 00000 00000 00000 0 ees BUSS
24 20 15 10 5
330

(4)
(5)

(6)

Row
Row
Row
Row
Row

Row

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

The card feeds must be plugged direct (see page 272),
The card punch must be plugged as shown in the following diagram,
PUNCH MAGNETS

5 10 15 20
25 30 35 40

oeee 0000 0000 0000 0000

45 50 55 60
0000 0000 0000 0000 0000

65 70 75 80
0000 e000 C000 02000 0000

COMP MAG OR CTR TOT EXIT ORMSIN

2A 2B 4A 4B 6A 6B
6B
osetee 0000 0000 09000 9000

Typewriter I must be plugged for positive or negative quantities, decimal point between columns
16 and 17, twelve digits to the right of the decimal! point, The digits are to be grouped by fours
to the right and left of the decimal point, argument control after two decimal places, Line step
counter 1 is to be plugged for vertical groups of five lines. Typewriter II is to be plugged for
positive or negative quantities, decimal point between columns 16 and 17, eight digits to the
right of thedecimal point, The digits are to be grouped by fours to the right and left of the deci-
mal point, argument control after two decimal places, Line step counter 2 is to be plugged for
vertical groups of fivelines, The plugging for the typewriters is shown in the following diagram,

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

DP TAB
1 @o0o000 o eee » ee 6 ee eo—e—e | TYPEWRITER I
1 5 10 | 1s]
R TAB .
z ooo o—e,0-++0 0 0 Oj/0 0 0 @ of]]0 0 0 o o | COL-SEL
if loo” “TTes? 30 35
| SPACES
3 0000 0{f{j0 €000 000 +700 0 O|o/!0 0 0 o o | PRINT CTR-RO
40 45
| {
4 0 eelee eeles ole ole ob b eo eleo—e 0 0 0 0 | PRINTCTR-RO
24 20 15 10 5
Cc
5 ee000 00 00 00000 00000 0000 0 | RO-RELS
25 24 20 | 15 10 5

6 bo0000 00000 00000 00000 00000
25 24 20 15 10 5

331
SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

FUNCTIONAL PLUGBOARD

DP TAB A

Row 8 60000 0 ee, e—er,e—o 86} ¢ ee e—e—e|; TYPEWRITER II
1 (5 10 | is]
R TAB
Row 9 oo0 -~o 00 0/10 00 017° 0 00 0f]!]0 0 o o of] COL-SEL
[ 20) 25 30 35
SPACES
Row10 0000 0ff00000|]|¥000 eH#00000 00000
40 45
: | I
Row 11 0 e-ele-e e-eleo ete ele ot—s $000 0000 ol] PRINT CTR-RO
24 20 15 10 5
c
Row12 ee000 o0o0 90 00000 00000 000 0 oj} RO-RELS

25 24 15 10 5

Row 13 60000 090000 00000 C0000 00000
25 24 15 10 5
Row18 00000 00000 00000 00000 ooobed

Row 38 00000 0000

Row 39 00000 0000

ee]
°
°
°
°
°
°
°
°
°

=]
°
°
°
°
c)

Example 8, It is to be noted that the starting and main control tapes of example 7 dictated only the
sequence of operations to be performed, The actual numbers dealt with; i.e., arguments, functions,
coefficients, tolerances, etc., were delivered to the machine from switches and punch cards, In some
cases, these quantities were rearranged by plugging through which they passed on their way to and
from the functional components of the calculator, Obviously, then, the tapes themselves are applicable
to a whole class of problems of which example 7 is merely a special case, The reader is advised to
arbitrarily formulate several problems similar to example 7 involving other integrands, and to devise

the instructions necessary to the solution of the chosen problems on the calculator.

Example 9, It is required that a single main control tape be designed to tabulate the integral,
x
I(x) JS; f(x)dx,

as defined in example 7, where f(x) is the function defined in example 6, This requires the combination
332

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

of the control tapes designed for examples 3, 4, 5 and 7. The interweaving of the coding of the tapes
is left as an exercise for the reader. This computation as performed by a single control tape should

not require more than 110 seconds per tabulated value of the integral.

Example 10, It is required that the series,

f(z) = ag + ayz+ ayz” + agz° + see t azo +R, (1)
be evaluated in the complex plane. The real coefficients Ag: 2y2 Ags Ags soe AD will be supplied from
a value tape on interpolator I, The complex quantities will be stored with the real and imaginary
parts in adjacent counters, Multiplication of a complex quantity by a real number requires two or-
dinary multiplications, The determination of an even power of a complex quantity requires three
ordinary multiplications, while the determination of an odd power requires four. The following coding
is designed to evaluate the first four terms of the series (1) for any point in the complex plane, The
coding has been planned, however, as though the series had many terms and required the conservation
of storage registers. The extension of the coding to care for terms involving powers of z greater
than the third is left to the reader as anexercise, The coding given in this example represents a sim-

plified version of the control tapes used to compute the modified Hankel functions of order one-third’,

Line | OUT IN MISC,

x or Ax from sw, 1 to ctr. 1 1 ial 1 7

compute ze 2 jl 761 q

y or Ay from sw, 2 to ctr.2 3 4 742 Z 7
4 21 21

5 2 7

6 41 41 7

ay to ctr, 9 from interpolator I 7 185 753

8 41

9 21 7

10 1 761 7

11 [3 3 7

a, to ctr, 8 from interpolator I

compute a,z

1

compute z

ay to ctr. 8 from interpolator I

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

333

Line |} OUT IN | MISC.
12 {14 4
13 1 7
14 {185 153
15 4 7
16 || 31 31
17 3 7
18 |/2 | 761 732
19 |}21 31 7
20 |/ 21 31
21 |/2 7
22 |/32 32 7
23 || 321 321 7
24 || 42 42
25 3 7
26 4 761
27 ijl
28 Al _ |
29 V4 761
30 |2
31 42 7
32 13 761 "
33 [21 21 7
34 |/4 4
35 [1 "
36 185 153
37 4
38 32 1

334

compute gz

a3

to ctr. 8 from interpolator I

compute agz”

a4

to ctr, 8 from interpolator I

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Line | OUT | IN | MISC,
39 31 161 ‘(32
40 lle
41 32 1
42 |3 761
43. lla
44 321 |7
45 [31 761
46 ili
47 321i

———".

4g iia 761
49 |I3
50 41 7
lt ——
51 ila m1 (7
52 |i4 4
53. 31 7
54 lias 753
55 4
56 42 1
57 (|l4 761
58 ||32
59 rt 7

a

60 (14 m1 [7
61 |l4 4
62 |/321 1
63. lI35 758
64 4
65 __ |e 7

335

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Example 11, It is suggested that the reader code the control tapes necessary for the computation and
checking of a functional tape for f(x) = are sin x, 0<x $0.9, The error in the interpolated values of
f(x) should be less than 6 x 19711, The following control tapes should be coded:

(a) starting and main control tapes to compute the interpolational coefficients;

(b) control tape to position the functional tape to the successive arguments and print the coef-
ficients;

(c) control tape to interpolate on assigned values of the argument,
The control tape to compute the interpolational coefficients should use an iterative process for the
computation of (1 - x2)71/2, The iterative formulae and their codings are given on pages 176-179 and
in example 4, pages 304-312, The number of interpolational coefficients required is discussed on
pages 198-199, The coding of the control tapes necessary to check the functional tape is presented

on pages 199-201,

Example 12, The Bessel function, Jo has been computed for an increment of the argument equal to
0.01, and punched in tabulating machine cards, It is suggested that the reader code the control tapes
necessary to subtabulate the function to tenths; i.e., for increment of the argument equal to 0.001,
The tape must, of course, completely check the computation and verify the printed results, Such a
tape, using the method described on pages 224-226, has been preserved in the tape library after being

used to subtabulate the Bessel functions,

Example 13, It is suggested that the reader design a control tape for the solution of the system of

linear algebraic equations,

941% 7 81, o%0 + oe +81 19% 19 = Ky
49,181 + 22 aX + 0 + 89 19X19 = Ky

710,171 * 910,2%2 + + + 249 16%10 = Ko»
by the process of successive elimination, The elements of the given matrix must be manually punched

in tabulating machine cards and stacked in two decks, one for the a; ? in the order Ay ys eo ay 10°
? 2 J

agp eoey 49 10° wens 410,27 coos 449,10? and the other for the k,, in the order ky Ko, eeey Kige
336

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

Assume the card decks containing the aj and the k to be placed in card feeds I and II respec-
tively, A main control tape may then dictate the following operations:

(1) feed 10 cards from card feed I to any 10 storage counters;

(2) feed 1 card from card feed II to any other storage counter;

(3) take the reciprocal ay

(4) multiply a4 29 ay 139 easy a1 10 and k, by 1/ay 43

(5) feed 10 cards from card feed I to any 10 storage counters not already in use;

(6) feed 1 card from card feed II to any storage counter not already in use;

(7) using the quantities read into storage counters in (5) and (6), repeat operations (3) and (4)
for A, 4) 25 53 oo) Ae op, and k,;
2,1’ 2,2 2,10 2

(8) make the necessary subtractions;

{9) repeat these operations until the given system is reduced to the form

%y + Dy oxo + by 3X + ve t by 1o%19 = hy
Xo + Dg 3% t +e + Bo rok 19 = By

eae e600 cee

L
‘
5

andthe ho ctand ts ER cals
Me j anu it 11, Slama il vu Sele
’. 1

(10) the values of the x: may then be obtained by substitution and printed or punched in tabu-
lating machine cards for further computation,
For efficient operation, fulladvantage must be taken of the methods of interposition, and all operations
must be checked, The compuiation and comparison of Ya; ;/a; 1 and (La, .j/a, , is one form of
J 4; 1,77 “1,1

check procedure,

The required control tape includes 4964 lines of coding, produces and completely checks the
values of Xj in approximately 55 minutes, The tape is one of the standard tapes preserved in the tape

library.

Nearly two years have passed since the staff of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard Univer-
sity began operation with the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator as a project of the United

States Navy. During this time, a great variety of problems has been solved finding application in
337

SOLUTION OF EXAMPLES

nearly every branch of physics and engineering. The problems solved include:
(1) the tabulation of functions of a real variable defined by given equations;
(2) the subtabulation of empirical functions;

(3) the computation and tabulation of quantities defined by elaborate formulae and in terms of
empirical variables;

(4) the tabulation of functions in the complex domain;

(5) the solution of systems of linear algebraic equations;

(6) statistical analysis;

(7) the determination of the zeros of functions;

(8) the evaluation of definite integrals;

(9) the solution of systems of ordinary differential equations;

(10) the solution of partial differential equations.

As previously mentioned, the examples given in this chapter have been chosen for their mathe-
matical simplicity, However, the solutions of the problems listed in the foregoing tabulation have all
been obtained by means of extensions of the techniques illustrated in the examples.

From time totime, the solution of these problems has required permanent changes in the wiring
of the calculator, and the inclusion of new features, many of which have greatly improved its oper-
ation, Such improvements and alterations are still in progress of development. Asa result, this
book goes to press representing the standard procedure of the Computation Laboratory as of August
1945,

References

1. Annals of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University, Volume II, Tables of the Modified
Hankel Functions of Order One-Third and of Their Derivatives, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass., 1945, xxxvi + 235 p,

2. Annals of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University, Volume II, Bessel Functions of
Orders Zero and One, to be published by the Harvard University Press in 1946,

Annals of the Computation Laboratory of Harvard University, Volume IV, Bessel Functions of
Orders Two and Three, to be published by the Harvard University Press in 1946,
338

BIBLIOGRAPHY
OF
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS

In practice, a computational problem is composed of three parts: the theoretical mathematical
analysis; the construction of a numerical computational schedule suitable for the particular calcula-
ting machines to be used; the actual carrying out of the machine computation. In connection with the
first two parts, it is necessary to consult widely scattered mathematical literature in an effort to
find adequate methods to treat new types of problems of applied mathematics. These methods have to be
further adapted to take full advantage of large scale calculating machinery.

In the preparation of this bibliography, full use has been made of available published bibli-
ographies, particularly those contained in the report on numerical methods by H, Bateman, W. E. Milne
and A. A. Bennett (see Ordinary Differential Equations), The bibliography is not intended to be ex-
haustive. It is composed principally of the references that have been found useful during the one and
one-half years of operation of the Automatic Sequence Controlled Caleulator.

In the bibliography, certain subjects that logically fall within the general field of numeri-
cal analysis have been omitted, for example, no mention is made of statistics, Such references as
have been included, however, have been classified for ready reference. Some of the titles could be
listed under several headings, and have been in the more important cases.

1. Historical Background of Automatic Calculating Machinery

2. Machine Methods in Arithmetic

3. General Numerical Methods

4, Linear Algebraic Eqations, Determinants and Matrices
iq Teast Senianas Mat bk. a
ge RCT US ee at ae

6. Square Roots and Higher Roots of Numbers
7. The Location and Separation of the Zeros of a Polynomial

8, The Calculation of the Zeros of a Polynomial
A. Iterative Methods (Newton-Raphson, False Position, etc.)
B. Root-Squaring and Allied Methods
C. Miscellaneous Methods

9, The Zeros of Transcendental Equations
A. Iterative Methods (see also under 8A)
B. Miscellaneous Methods
339

BIBLIOGRAPHY

10, ‘Implicit Functions
11. Harmonic Analysis
12. Periodogram Analysis
13. Finite Differences
4. Difference Equations
15. Direct Interpolation
A. Functions of a Single Variable
B. Functions of Several Variables
16. Inverse Interpolation, Tabulation and Subtabulation
17. Interpolation Tables
18. Asymptotic Expansions -
19, Numerical Differentation and Higher Derivatives
20, Numerical Integration of Definite Integrals
A. Functions of a Single Variable
B. Functions of Several Variables
21. Ordinary Differential Equations
22, Partial Differential Equations

23. ‘Integral Equations

1. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF AUTOMATIC CALCULATING MACHINERY

BABBAGE, C. On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, London, 1846.
BABBAGE, C. Passages from the Life of a Philosopher. London, 1864.

BAXANDAIL, D. Catalogue of the Collections in the Science Museum, South Kensington. Mathematics I,
Calculating Machines and Instruments. London, 1926.

CAJORI, F. A History of Mathematics, New York, 2nd ed. 1919,
CAJORI, F. History of the Logarithmic Slide Rule. New York, 1909.
CAJORI, F, William Oughtred. Chicago, 1916.

DYCK, W. Katalog mathematischer und mathematisch-physikalischer Modelle, Apparate und Instrumente.
Munich, 1892.

GALLE, A, Mathematische Instrumente. Leipzig, 1912.

HORSBURGH, E. M. Calculating machines. A Dictionary of Applied Physics. Richard Glazebrook ed,
London, 1923, vol. 3, p. 193-201.

HORSBURGH, E. M, Modern Instruments and Methods of Calculation. London, 1914.
JACOB, L. Le calcul mécanique. Paris, 1911.
D'OCAGNE, M. = Le calcul simplifié, Paris,1905.
340

BIBLIOGRAPHY

DIOCAGNE, M. Yoe d'ensemble sur les machines & calculer, Paris, 1922.
POSSELT, E. Ae The Jacquard Machine, Philadelphia, 189-?.
TURCK, J. A. Ve Origin of Modern Calculating Machines. Chicago, 1921. ~

2. MACHINE METHODS IN ARITHMETIC
COMRIE, L. J. Mechanical computing. Appendix I, p. 462-473 of David Clark, Plane and Geodetic Sur-
veying, vol. 2, 3rd ed., revised by James Glendenning. London, Constable, 1943.
COMRIE, L. d. Recent progress in scientific computing. Jour. Sci. Instr. 21, 129-135 (1944).
HARTKEMBIER, H. P. and MILLER, H. E. Obtaining differences from punched cards. Jour, Amer. Statist.

Qae oad fags

Assoc. 37, 285-287 (1942).

KNUDSEN, L. F. A punched card technique to obtain coefficients of orthogonal polynomials. Jour.
Amer. Statist. Assoc. 37, 496-506 (1942).

LANCASTER, O. E. Machine method for the extraction of cube root. Jour, Amer, Statist. Assoc. 37,
122-115 (1942).

MecPHERSON, J. C. On mechanical tabulation of polynomials. Ann, Math. Statist. 12, 317-327 (1941).

MePHERSON, J. C, Mathematical operations with punched cards, Jour. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 37, 275-
; 261 (1942).

SANDOMIRE, M. M. Accumulating cubes with punch cards. Jour. Amer, Statist. Assoc, 36, 507-514 (1941).

3. GENERAL NUMERICAL METHODS

BIERMANN, 0. Vorlesungen uber mathematischen Naherungsmethoden. Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1905, 226 p.
BRUNS, H. Grundlinien des wissenschaftlichen Rechnens. Leipzig, Teubner, 1903, 159 p.
CASSINIS, G. Calcoli numericd, grafici e meccanici. Pisa, Mariotti-Pacini, 1928, xix + 672 p.

CASSINA, U. Caicolo numerico con numerosi esempi e note storicne originaii. Bologna, Zanichelii,
1928, xix + 453 pe

COURANT, R. Differential and Integral Calculus. (New revised edition) New York, Nordemann, 1940,
vol. 1, chap. 7, p. 342-364.

HAYASHI, K.  Tafeln fur die Differenzenrechnung... Berlin, Springer, 1933, vi+ 66 p.
LEHMER, D. H. On the value of the Napierian Base. Amer, Jour. Math. 48, 139-143 (1926).

LERMER, D. N., BALLANTINE, J. P. and THOMPSON, D'A. W. On the miltiplication of long decimals, Amer.
Math, Month. 30, 67-69 (1923).

LINDOW, M. Numerische Infinitesimalrechnung. Berlin and Bonn, Dumler, 1928, viii + 176 p.
LUROTH, de Vorlesungen uber numerisches Rechnen, Leipzig, Teubner, 1900, vi + 194 p.
MACCAFERRI, E. Calcolo numerico approssimto. Milan, Hoepli, 1919, 200 p,

MADER, K. Numerisches Rechnen. Handbuch der Physik,vol. 3, Berlin, Springer, 1928, p. 599-635,
341

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MAYER, J. E. Das Rechnen in der Technik und seine Hilfsmittel. Vol. 405 of Sammlung Goschen. leipzig,
Goschen, Ist ed. 1908; 2nd ed. 1913, 128 p.

MILNE-THOMPSON, L. M. Calculus of Finite Differences. London, Macmillan, 1933, xxiii + 558 p.

PESCI, G. ( wp decimali approssimati... Period. Mat.: (3) 1, 249-268; (3) 2, 1-21, 49-71
1904).

RADAU, R. Etude sur les formes d'interpolation. Paris, Gauthier~Villars, 1891, 96 p.

RICE, H. L. Theory and Practice of Interpolation. Lynn, Nichols, 1899, 234 p.

RUNGE, C. and KONIG, H. Vorlesungen uber Numerisches Rechnen. Berlin, Springer, 1924, viii+371 p.
VON SANDEN, H. Praktische Analysis. Leipzig, Teubner, 2nd ed. 1923, xvi + 195 p.

VON SANDEN, H. Mathematisches Praktikum. I, Leipzig, Teubner, 1927, v + 122 p.

SCARBOROUGH, J. B. Numerical Mathematical Analysis. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1930,xiv+416 p.
SCHRUTKA, L. Zahlenrechnen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1923, 146 p.

SHEPPARD, W. Fe Mensuration. Encyclopaedia Britannica. lth ed. 1929, vol. 15, p. 253~257.
STEFFENSEN, J. F, Interpolation. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1927, ix + 248 p.

THIELE, T. N. Interpolationsrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 1909, 175 p.

UHLER, H. S. Multiplication of large numbers, Amer. Math. Month, 28, 447-448 (1921).

VAHLEN, T. Konstruktionen und Approximationen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1911, xii + 349 p.

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, A Treatise on Numerical Mathematics.
London and Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1940, xvi + 395 p.

WILLERS, F. A. Methoden der Praktischen Analysis. Berlin, de Gruyter, 1928, 344 p.
WORTHING, A. G. and GEFFNER, J. Treatment of Experimental Data. New York, Wiley, 1943, ix +342 pe
XAVIER, A. Théorie des approximations numériques et du calcul abrégé. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1909.

ZORETTI, L. , Exercices numériques et graphiques de mathématiques sur les legons de mathématiques
générales. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1914, xv + 124 p.

4 LINEAR ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS, DETERMINANTS AND MATRICES.
AITKEN, A. C. Studies in practical mathematics. II. The evaluation of the latent roots and latent
vectors of a matrix, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin., Sect. A, 57, 269-30 (1936-1937).
BELLMAN, R. A note on determinants and Hadamard's inequality. Amer. Math. Month. 50, 550-551 (1943).

BINGHAM, M. ra yo method for obtaining the inverse matrix, Jour. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 36, 530=
534 (1941).

BISSHOPP, K. E. The inverse of a stiffness matrix, Quart. Appl. Math. 3, 82-84 (1945).

BRAND, L. The method of moment distribution for the analysis of continuous structures. Bull, Amer.

CcHIO, F, Mémoire sur les fonctions conmes sous le nom de résultantes ou de déterminants. Turin,
1853.
342

BIBLIOGRAPHY

COLLAR, A. Re On the reciprocation of certain matrices. Proc. Roy. Soc, Edin. 59, 195-206 (1939).

COLLATZ, Le Feblerabschatzung fur das Iterationsverfahren zur Auf losung linesrer Gleichungssysteme.
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 357=361 (1942).

COURANT, R. and HILBERT, D. Methoden der Mathematischen Physik. Vol, I, Berlin, Springer, 2nd ed.
1931, xiv + 469 p., chap. I.

CROSS, H. Analysis of continuous frames by distributing fixed-end moments. Paper No. 1793. Trans.
Amer. Soc. Civil Engrs. 96, 1-10 (1932).

DRESDEN, A. On the iteration of linear homogeneous transformations. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 48, 577-
579, 949 (1942).

DYER, P. S. The evaluation of multiple and partial correlation coefficients from the factorial ma-
trix, Psychometrika 5, 211-232 (1940).

Dwren, P. S. The solution of simultaneous equations. Psychometrika 6, 101-129 (19,
DWYER, P. S. The evaluation of determinants. Psychometrika 6, 191-204 (1941).
DNYER, P. &. The evaluation of linear forms, Psychometrika 6, 355-365 (1941).

DWYER, P. S. The Doolittle technique. Ann. Math. Statist, 12, 449-458 (1941).

ERIKSSON, H. A. S. A technique for the approximate calculation of eigenvalues as zeros of a de-
owe Application to the Lit -ion in the ground state. Arkiv fér Mat. 30B, No. 6, 8 p.
19LL) «

ETHERINGTON, I. M. H. On errors in determinants. Proc, Edin. Math. Soc. (2) 3, 107-117 (1932).

FARNELL, Ae B. ) Limits for the characteristic roots of a matrix. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 50, 789-794
(1944) » :

FRAZER, R. A., DUNCAN, W. J. and COLLAR, A. R. Elementary Matrices and some Applications to Dynamics
and Differential Equations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1938, p. 96=133.

FREEMAN, G. F. On the iterative solution of linear simltaneous equations. Phil. Mag. (7) 34, 409
416 (1943).

HADAMARD, J. Résolution d'une question relative aux déterminants, Bull. Sci. Math. (2) 17, 240-246
18

HOEL, P. G, The errors involved in evaluating correlation determinants, Ann. Math. Statist. 1, 58
65 (1940).

HOEL, P. G. On methods of solving normal equations. Ann. Math. Statist. 12, 354-359 (1941).

HOPSTEIN, N. M. Solution of homogeneous linear equations by the iteration method. C. R. (Doklady)

Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 43, 372-375 (1944).
HORST, P. A non-graphical method for transforming an arbitrary factor matrix into a simple structure
factor matrix, Psychometrika 6, 79-99 (1941).
HOTELLING, H. Simplified calculation of principal components, Psychometrika 1, 27-35 (1936).
HOTELLING, H. Some new methods in matrix calculation. Ann. Math. Statist. 14, 1-34 (1943).

HOTELLING, H. Further points on matrix calculation and similtaneous equations, Ann. Math. Statist.
1, 440-441 (1943).

IVANOV, V. On the convergence of the process of iteration in the solution of a system of linear
algebraic equations. (Russian, English summary,), Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS Sér. Math. (Izvestia

Alea. Nauk SSQRP) 1020 199192 1020
ataesenne svenenen Reheirey ZU gy AT ITH LISTE
343

BIBLIOGRAPHY

IEVY, S. Buckling of rectangular plates with built-in edges. Jour. Appl. Mech. 9, AL71-A174 (1942).

LONSETH, A. T. Systems of linear equations with coefficients subject to error. Ann. Math. Statist.
13, 332-337 (1942).

LONSETH, A. T. On relative errors in systems of linear equations. Ann. Math. Statist. 15, 323-325
(1944).

MEHMKE, RF. Wher das Seidel'sche Verfahren, um lineare Gleichungen bei einer sehr grossen Anzahl der
Unbekannten durch successive Annsherung aufzulosen, Math. Samm). Mosk. 16, 4 p. (1892).

*

MEHMKE, R. and NEKRASSOFF, P. A. Auflosung eines linearen Systems von Gleichungen durch successive
Annaherung, Math, Samml. Mosk. 16, 23 p. (1892).

MEINEKE, H. Naherungsformel fur die Berechnung von Strecken. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 20, 359 (1940).
MILNE-THOMPSON, L. M. Determinant expansions. Math. Gaz. 25, 130-135 (1941).

MORRIS, J. and HEAD, J. W. Lagrangian frequency equations, An "escalator" method for numerical
solution, Aircraft Engrg. 14, 312-314, 316 (1942).

OLDENBURGER, R. Convergence of Hardy Cross's balancing process. Jour. Appl. Mech. 7, A166-A170(194,0).
PARKER, W. V. Limits to the characteristic roots of a matrix. Duke Math. Jour. 10, 479-482 (1943).
PIPES, L. A. The solution of a.c. circuit problems. Jour. Appl. Phys. 12, 685-691 (1941).

REIERS@L, 0. A method for recurrent computation of all the principal minors of a determinant, and
its application in confluence analysis. Ann, Math. Statist. 11, 193-198 (1940).

RICE, L. H. Some determinant expansions. Amer. Jour. Math. 42, 237-242 (1920).
RUNGE, C. and KONIG, H. Vorlesungen uber numerisches Rechnen. Berlin, Springer, 1924, p. 183-188,
SAIBEL, E, A modified treatment of the iterative method. Jour. Franklin Inst. 235, 163=166 (1943).

SAIBEL, Ee A recan method of inversion of certain types of matrices. Jour. Franklin Inst. 237, 197-

SAMUELSON, P. A. A method of determining explicitly the coefficients of the characteristic equation.
Amn, Math. Statist. 13, 424-429 (1942).

SATTERTHWAITE, F. E. Error control in matrix calculation. Ann, Math. Statist. 15, 373-387 (1944).

SCHMIDT, R. J. ‘On the numerical solution of linear simultaneous equations by an iterative method,
Phil. Mag. (7) 32, 369-383 (1941).

SCHULZ, G. Uber 12) Losung von Gleichungssystemen durch Iteration, Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 23h-
235 (1942).

SEIDEL, L. Ueber ein Verfahren, die Gleichungen, auf welche die Methode der kleinsten Quadrate
» ,80wie lineare Gleichungen Uberhaupt, durch successive Annherung aufzulésen. Abh.
Akad. Munchen 11 (III), 81-108 (187;).

SEMENDIAEV, K, A. The determination of latent roots and invariant manifolds of matrices by means of
iterations. (Russian, English summry.). Appl. Math. Mech. (Akad. Nauk SSSR, Prikl. Mat.
Mech.) 7, 193-222 (1943).

SOUTHWELL, R. V. Stress calculations in frame-works by the method of systematic relaxation of
constraints, I, II; III. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond.: Al51, 56-95; A153, 41-76 (1935).

SPOERL, C. A. A fundamental proposition in the solution of similtaneous linear equations. Trans,
Actuar. Soc. Amer. 44, 276-288 (1943).
344

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SPOERL, C. A. On solving simltansous linear equations. Trans. Actuar, Soc. Amer. 45, 18-32. 67-69
(1944).

SYNGE, J. ra * geometrical interpretation of the relaxation method, Quart. Appl. Math, 2, 87-89
19h) » .

TUCKER, L. R. The determination of successive principal components without computation of tables
of residual correlation coefficients. Psychometrika 9, 149-153 (1944).

TUCKERMAN, L. B. On the mathematically significant figures in the solution of similtaneous linear
equations. Ann. Math, Statist. 12, 307-316 (1941).

TURAN, P. On extremal problems concerning determinants, (Hungarian. English summary.). Math. Natur-
wiss.Anz. Ungar. Akad. Wiss. 59, 95-105 (1940).

TURTON, F. J. On the solution of the numerical simltaneous equations arising in the analysis of re-
dundant structures. Jour. Roy. Aeronaut. Soc. 49, 104-111(1945).

ULIMAN, J. The probability of convergence of an iterative process of inverting a matrix. Ann. Math.
Statist. 15, 205-213 (1944).

WAYLAND, H. 6 Gay of determinantal equations into polynomial form, Quart. Appl. Math. 2, 277-
306 (1945).

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1942,p.
Tl-77.

WHITTAKER, E. T. and WATSON, G. N. A course of Modern Analysis, Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Amer. ed, 19hA, Pe 212-213.

WRIGHT, L. T., dr. The solution of simltaneous linear equations by an approximation method. Cornell
Univ. Engrg. Exper. Station. Bull. Ne. 31, 1943, 6p.

& TRA Tt
5. LEAST SQUARES

BANACHIEWICZ, T. An outline of the Cracovian algorithm of the method of least squares. Astr. Jour.
50, 38-41 (1942).

BERJMAN, 5. A solution of the problem of least squares adjustment by Gauss polynomials. (Spanish).
An. Soc. Ci. Argentina: 132, 34-48, lOh-117, 212-217 (1941); 133, 208-215, Ak2—445 (1942).

BIRGE, R. T. and SHEA, J. D. A rapid method for calculating the least squares solution of a poly-
nomial of any degree. Univ. of Calif. Publs. Math. 2, No. 5, 1927, p. 67-118.

BLEICK, W. E. A least squares accumlation theorem, Ann, Math, Statist. 11, 225-226 (1940).

DAVIS, H. 156 ( oS approximation by the method of least squares, Ann. Math. Statist. 4, 15h-
1 1983).

DAVIS, H. T. and LATSHAW, V. V. Formulas for the fitting of polynomials by the method of least
squares. Ann. of Math. (2) 31, 52-78 (1930).

DWYER, P. S, A matrix presentation of least squares and correlation theory with matrix justification
of improved methods of solution. Ann. Math. Statist. 15, 62-89 (1944).

IDELSON, N. On the computation of weights of the unknowns in the method of least squares. (Russian,
English sumary,), Astr. Jour, Soviet Union 20, 11-13 (1943).

JACKSON, D. The Theory of Approximation. New York, Amer. Math. Soc. Collog. Publs. vol. XI (Amer.
Math. Soc.) 1930, vili + 178 p.
345

BIBLIOGRAPHY

KERAWALA, 5. M. A rapid method for calculating the least squares solution of a polynomial of degree
not exceeding the fifth. Indian Jour. Phys. 15, 241-276 (1941).

LEVENBERG, K. A method for the solution of certain non-linear problems in least squares. Quart.
Appl. Math. 2, 164-168 (1944).

NAIR, K. R. and SHRIVASTAVA, M. P. On a simple method of curve fitting. Sankhya 6, 121-132 (1942).

PIARR, G. Note sur une propriété commune aux séries dont le terme général dépend des fonctions
de Legendre, ou des cosinus et sinus des mitiples de la variable. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris

Ab, 984-986 (1857).
REMBS, E. J. Sur les approximations par les moyennes d'ordre 2k et celles d'aprés le principe des
noindres earrés, (Russian. French summary.), Rec. Math. (Mat. Sbornik) N.S. 9 (51) 437-450

STONER, P, M. Fitting the exponential function and the ti pele function by the method of least
squares, Jour. Amer. Statist, Assoc. 36, 515-518 (1941).

6. SQUARE ROOTS AND HIGHER ROOTS OF NUMBERS
BOORMAN, J. M. Evolution simplified: Square root found by addition instead of division, Math. Mag.
(publ. Artemas Martin) 1, 112-115 (1882-1884).

DEDERICK, ra 38) A modified method for cube roots and fifth roots. Amer, Math, Month. 33, 469-472
1926).

VON FEHRENTHEIL und GRUPPENBERG, L. R. . Vereinfachte Quadratwurzelziehung mit der Rechenmaschine.
Zeit. Instrumentenkunde 62, 227-230 (1942).

HOFMANN, J. E. Uber ein "neves" Verfahren zur Annaherung von Quadratwurzeln und seine geschichtliche
Bedeutung. Deutsche Math. 6, 453-461 (1942).

HUSSAIN, st T. ) A method of extracting the nth root of a positive number. Math. Student ll, 12-15,

LANCASTER, O. E. Machine method for the extraction of cube root. Jour. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 37,
112-115 (1942).

LEHMER, D. H. On the use of the calculating machine for cube and fifth roots. Amer. Math. Month.
32, 377-379 (1925).

LOREY, W. ( ter ein Eulersches Verfahren gir Wurzelberechnung. Monatsh, Math. Phys. 48, 190-197
1939).

MARTIN, A. Computation of the cube root of 2. Mess, of Math. 7, 50-51 (1878).
MARTIN, 4. = Extraction of square roots by series. Math. Mag. 1, 164-165, 172 (1882-18a).

PUTNAM, K. S. First-prize solution to problem of the best forma for J x. To illustrate by ¢ 2
to 100 decimals, Math. Visitor 2 (#2), 31 (1883).

WARD, G. W. © Successive approximations to (/@. Math. Gaz. 17, 52-53, 127 (1933).
7. ‘THE LOCATION AND SEPARATION OF THE ZEROS OF A POLYNOMIAL

ANGHELUTZA, T. Sur une limite des modules des zéros dea polynomes. Acad, Roum. Bull. Sect. Sct.
21, 211-213 (1939).
346

BIBLIOGRAPHY

APARO, E. Di aleune avvertenze sulla risoluzione mamerica delle equazioni algebriche. Univ. Roma e
Ist. Naz. Alta Mat. Rend. Mat. e Appl. (5) 4, 125~147 (1943).

BIEBERBACH, L. Vorlesungen Uber Algebra. Leipzig and Berlin, Teubner, 1928, p. 171, 186.
BIERERBACH, L. Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie. Leipzig and Berlin, Teubner, 1930, vol.I, pe 190-192.
BUDAN, D. § Nouvelle méthode pour la résolution des équations mumériques... Paris, 2nd ed, 1822,

BURNSIDE, W. S. and PANTON, A. W. Theory of Equations. Dublin, Hodges and Figges, 8th ed, 1918, vol.
I, chap. 10, ll.

CARACCIOLO, M.S. Delle equazioni a radici opposte. Boll. Mat. (4) 1, 33-38 (1940).

CAUCHY, A. L. Analyse algébrique. Note III, See Oeuvres complétes d'Augustin Cauchy, (2) vol. 3.
Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1897, p. 378-425.

SHY, A. Le Exercices de mathématiques. See Oeuvres, (2) vol. 9. Paris, 1891, p. 109-132, 151-156.

COHN, A. Uber die Anzahl der Worzeln einer algebraischen Gleichung in einem Kreise. Math. Zeit. 14,
120-148 (1922).

CORKTRIGHT NX. fs An elementary proof of the Budan-Fourler theorem. Amer, Math. Month. 50, 603-605
1943).

COPSON, E. T. An Introduction to the Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable. Oxford, Oxford

CORLISS, J. J *( Upper limits to the real roots of an algebraic equation. Amer, Math, Month. 46, 334=
338 (1939).

DELANGE, H. Sur ls convergence des series de polynomes de la forme x a,P (2) et sur certaines suites
de polynomes, Ann. Ecole Norm. Sup, 56, 173-275 (1939).

FEJER, L. {er die Wurzel vom kleinsten absoluten Betrage einer algebraischen Gleichung. Math, Ann.
855 423-423 (1907-1908).

FOURIER, J. B. J. Analyse des equations déterminées. Paris, Didot, 1830, xxiv + 258 p.

FRAZER, R. A., DUNCAN, W. J. and COLLAR, A. R. Elementary Matrices and Some Applications to Dynamics
and Differential Equations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1938, p. 151-155.

FRICKE, R. Lehrbuch der Algebra, Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1924, vol. I part 2, chap. 3.
GENOCCHI, A. Démonstration d'un théoréme de M. Sylvester. Nouv. Ann. Math. (2) 6, 6-20 (1867).

HERGLOTZ, G. Uber die Wurzelanzahl algebraischer Gleichungen innerhalb und auf dem Einheitskreis.
Math. Zeit. 19, 26-34 (1923).

HURWITZ, A. Ueber die Bedingungen, unter welchen eine Gleichung nur Wurzeln mit negativen reellen
Theilen besitzt. Math. Ann. 46, 273-284 (1895).

KHARADSE, A. Eine Anwendung des Graceschen Faltungssatzes. (Russian. German summary.). Mitt. Georg.
Abt. Akad. Wiss, USSR 1, 175+180 (1940).

KNESER, H. Zur Stetigkeit der Wurzeln einer algebraischen Gleichung, Math. Zeit. 48, 101-104 (1942).

KONIG, J. Ein allgemeiner Ausdruck fur die ihrem absoluten Betrage nach kleinste wWurzel der Gleich-
ung n~ten Grades, Math. Ann. 9, 530-540 (1875-1876).

KRONECKER, L. ber Systeme von Functionen mehrer Variablen. Ges. Werke, vol. I. Leipzig, Teubner,
1895, pe 177-226.

KRONECKER, L. ther die verschiedenen Sturm'schen Reihen und ihre gegenseitigen Beziehungen. Ges.
Werke, vol. I. Leipzig, Teubner, 1895, p. 305-348.
347

BIBLIOGRAPHY

KRONECKER, L. Sur le théoréme de Sturm. Ges. Werke vol. I, Leipzig, Teubner, 1895, p. 22%23k.

KRONECKER, L. Boer die Charakteristik von Functionen-Systemen. Ges. Werke vol. II. Leipzig, Teubner,
1897, p. 71-82.

LAGRANGE, J. L. De la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés. Paris, Duprat, 1798,
vii + 268 p., chap. I, p. 4-20; Note iv, p. 124-135; Note viii, p. 165-180.

LIPKA, S. Sper die, Absahlung der reellen Wurzeln von algebraischen Gleichungen. Math. Zeit. 47, 343-
351 (1941

LIPKA, 5. Uber die Vorzeichenregeln von Budan-Fourier und Descartes. Jber. Deutsch. Math. Verein.
52, 204-217 (1942).

MADHAVA RAO, B. S. and SASTRY, B. S. On the limits for the roots of a polynomial equation. Jour.
Mysore Univ. Sect. B. Vol. I, 5-8 (1940).

MARKOFF, A. On the determination of the number of roots of an algebraic equation, situated ina
given domain, Rec. Math, (Mat. Sbornik) N. S. 7 (49), 3-6 (1940).

MAXIMOFF, I. On neighboring roots. C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N. 5.) 37, 88-90 (1942).
MONTEL, P. Observation sur la commnication précédente. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 210, 654-655 (1940).

MONTGOMERT J. : The roots of a polynomial and its derivative. Bull, Amer, Math. Soc. 47, 621-624
1941).

NEWTON, I. Universal Arithmetick. (Translation and revision by Mr. Ralphson and Mr. Cunn of Arith-
metica Universalis) London, 1728, 441 + 271 p., p. 190-198, 204-208,

OBRESCHKOFF, N. ther algebraische Gleichungen, die nur Wurzeln mit negativen Realteilen besitzen.
Math, Zeit. 45, 7h7-750 (1939).

OSTROWSKI, A. Sur la continuité relative des racines d'’equations algébriques. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
209, TT7-779 (1939).

PASCAL, E. Repertorium der hdheren Mathematik. Vol. I (1). Leipzig, Teubner, 2nd ed. 1910, p. 349-
3

PERRON, 0. Algebra. Berlin, de Gruyter, 2nd ed. 1927, vol. II, chap. I.
PHRAGMEN, E. Sur une extension du theoréme de Sturm, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 114, 205-208 (1892).
PUND, 0. Algebra... Vol. 6 of Sammlung Schubert. Leipzig, Goschen, 1899, vidi + 345 po, pe 243-267.

RUNGE, C. Gleichungen. Separation und Approximation der Wurzeln, Ency. Math. Wiss., Leipzig,
Teubner, 1899, I B 3a sections 2-9, p. 407—432.

SERGESCU, P. Sur les limites de J. J. Bret. C. R. Acad. Sei. Paris 210, 652-654 (1940).

SERGESCU, r; Généralisations des limites de J. J. Bret, Acad. Roum. Bull. Sect. Sci. 22, 460-465
1940) «

SPECHT, W. Murzelabschatzungen bei algebraischen Gleichungen. Jber. Deutsch. Math. Verein, 49, 179=
190 (1940).

STERN, M. A. Boer die Anwendung der Sturmschen Methode auf transcendente Gleichungen. Jour. Reine
Angew. Math. 33, 363-365 (1846).

STURM, C. ( Xénoire sur la résolution des équations numériques. Par. Mém. Sav. (Etr.) 6, 271-318
1835).
348

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SYLVESTER, J. d. on an improved form of statement of a new rule for the separation of the roots of
an algebraical equation, with a postscript containing a new theorem. Phil. Mag. (4) 31,
2Uj-218 (1866). ;

VON 5Z. NAGY, G. Soer ganze Funktionen mit lauter reellen Nulistellen, Univ. Nac. Tucumin, Revista
A. 1, 303-311 (1940).

TERRACINI, A. Some elementary remarks concerning the reality of the roots of an algebraic equation.
(Spanish). Math. Notae 4, 137-144 (1944).

THOMAS, J. M. Sturm's theorem for mitiple roots. Nat. Math. Mag. 15, 391-394 (1941).

THUE, A. Ein Fundamentaltheorem zur Bestimmng von Annaherungswerten aller Wurzeln gewisser ganzer
Funktionen, Jour, Reine Angew. Math, 138, 96-108, (1910).

VIJAYARAGHAVAN, T. Ona theorem of J. L. Walsh concerning the moduli of zeros of polynomials, Proc.
Ind, Acad. Sei., Sect. A, 16, 83-86 (1942).

WARING, E, Meditationes algebraicae. Cambridge, 3rd ed. 1782, xliv + 403 p., p. 36-116.

WEBER, H. Lehrbuch der Algebra, Kleine Ausgabe. Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1912, chap. &, pe 135-154.
WEISNER, L. Moduli of the roots of polynomials and power series. Amer. Math. Month. 48, 33-36 (1941).
WEISNER, L. Polynomials whose roots lie in a sector. Amer. Jour. Math. 64, 55-60 (1942).

WEISNER, L. Roots of certain classes of polynomials. Bull. Amer. Wath. Soc. 48, 283-286 (1942).

8. THE CALCULATION OF THE ZEROS OF A POLYNOMIAL

A. Iterative Methods (Newton-Raphson, False Position, etc.)

BURNSIDE, W. S. and FANTON, a. W. Theory of Equations. Yol. 1, Dublin, Hodges and Pigges

1918, p. 225-248.

CASALE, F. Su di una equazione collegata a quella di Keplero. I, II. Rend. Ist. Lombardo 72, 333-
346, 347-361 (1939).

DANDELIN, G, Recherches sur la résolution des équations rumériques, Mem, Acad, Roy. Bruxelles 3,
vt7l pe, (1826).

DARBOUX, J. G. Sur la méthode d'approximation de Newton. Nouv. Ann. Math, (2) 8, 17-27 (1869).
FABER, G. Uber die Newtonsche Naherungsformel. Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 138, 1-21 (1910).

FABER, G.  Eher die Newtonsche Naherungsformel (Zweite Abhandlung). Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 146,
229-233 (1916).

FOURET, G. Sur le méthode d'approximation de Newton. Nouv. Ann. Math. (3) 9, 567-585 (1890).

FOURIER, J. B. J. Analyse des équations déterminées, Premiére partie. Paris, Didot, 1830,
xxiv + 258 p., p. 157-223.

HEYMANN, W. Theorie der An-und UmlSufe und Auflosung der Gleichungen vom vierten, flinften und
sechsten Grade mittelst goniometrischer und hyperbolischer Functionen. Jour. Reine Angew.
Math, 113, 267-302 (1894).

HEYMANN, W. Ueber die elementare Auflosung transcendenter Gleichungen. Zeit, Math. Naturwiss.
Unterricht. 29, 1-15 (1898).

HEYMANN, W. ther Wurzelgruppen, welche durch Umldufe ausgeschnitten werden, Zeit, Math, Phys. 46,
265-297 (1901).
349

BIBLIOGRAPHY

HUBER, A. toer Konvergenz-und Divergenzintervalle des Newtonschen Verfahrens. Sitzber. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 134, 405-425 (1925).

ISENKRAHE, C. Ueber die Anwendung iterirter Functionen zur Darstellung der Wurzeln algebraischer
und transcendenter Gleichungen, Math. Ann. 31, 309-317 (1888).

LAGRANGE, J. L. De la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés. Paris, 1798, chap. 3.

LAGUERRE, E, Sur l'approximation des fonctions circulaires au moyen des fonctions algébriques.
Oeuvres de Laguerre, vol. 1. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1698, p. 104~—107.

LEGENDRE, A. He Supplement & l'essai sur la théorie des nombres, seconde (1808) édition. Paris,
Courcier, 1816, p. 28-60,

LEMERAY, EM. Sur le calcul des racines des équations par approximations successives, Nouv, Ann,
Math. (3) 17, 534-539 (1898).

LEVI, 8B. On the approximate solution of transcendental equations represented by Taylor series.
(Spanish). Math, Notae 3, 1-40 (1943).

LURoTH, J. Vorlesungen Uber numerisches Rechnen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1900, 194 p.
’

MEHMKE, R. Neue Methode beliebige numerische Gleichungen mit einer Unbekannten graphische aufzulosen,
Ein Beitrag zum graphischen Rechnen, Civilingenieur (2) 35, 617-634 (1889).

MEHMKE, R. Praktische Methode zur Berechnung der reellen Wurzeln reeller algebraischer oder trans~
cendenter numerischer Gleichungen mit einer Unbekannten. Zeit. Math, Phys. 36, 158-187

(1891).

NETTO, E. Ueber einen Algorithms zur Auflosung numerischer algebraischer Gleichungen. Math. Ann.

NETTO, E. Vorlesungen uber Algebra. I, Leipzig, Teubner, 1896, p. 281-290.

NETTO, E. Elementare Algebra, Akademische Vorlesungen fur Studierende der ersten Semester, Arti-
eles 22, 45, 8&8. Leipzig, Teubner, 1904. .

NEWTON, I. De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas: Cap. iv, Exempla per resolutionem
aequationum, In vol. 1 of Isaaci Newtoni opera quae exstant omia, Samel Horsley, ed.
London, J. Nichols, 1779, p. 268-270.

OSTROWSKI, A. , Sur la convergence et l'estimation des erreurs dans quelques procédés de résolution
des équations. Memorial volume dedicated to D. A. Grave. Moscow, 1940, p. 213-234.

PASCAL, E. Repertorium der hoheren Mathematik. Vol. I (1). Leipzig, Teubner, 1910, p. 352-357.

PAWLEY, M. G. New criteria for accuracy in approximating real roots by the Newton-Raphson method,
Nat. Math. Mag. 15, 111-220 (1940).

RAPHSON, J. Analysis aequationum universalis, London, 1690.

REHBOCK, F. Zur Konvergenz des Newtonschen Verfahrens fur Gleichungssysteme. Zeit. Angew. Math.
Mech, 22, 261-262 (1942). .

RICHMOND, H. W. On certain formae for mmerical approximation. Jour.Lond.Math.Soc. 19, 31-38(1944).
RICHMOND, H. W. On the Newton-Raphson method of approximation. Edin. Math. Notes 3h, 5-8 (1944).
ROSS, R. A method of solving algebraic equations. Nature: 78, 663~665 (1908); 79, 398-399 (1908).

RUNGE, C. Gleichungen. Separation und Approximation der Wurzeln, Ency. Math. Wiss., Leipzig,
Teubner, 1899, I B 3a, p. 433-439, Abb-448.

RUNGE, C. and KONIG, H. Vorlesungen Uber Numerisches Rechnen, Berlin, Springer, 1924, p. 152-157,
350

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SCARBOROUGH, J. B. Numerical Mathematical Analysis. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1930, p. 178-195.

Wath

SCHEFFLER, H- Auflosung der algebraischen Gleichungen. Braunschweig, 1859. Quoted from Ency. Math.
Wise. Vol. 1, p. 446.

SCHROEDER, E. Uber unendlich viele Algorithmen zur Auflésung der Gleichungen. Math. Ann. 2, 317-363
(1870).

SEIDEL, L. , Uber ein Verfahren, die Gleichungen, auf welche die Methode der Kleinsten Quadrate
fuhrt, sowie linedre Gleichungen uberhaupt, durch successive Annaherung aufzuldsen. Abh.
Akad, Minchen 11, 81 (1874). :

SMITH, D. E. History of Mathemtics. Vol. 2: Special Topics of Elementary Mathematics. Boston, Ginn,
1925, Pe 437—4h1.

TAUBER, A. Uber die Newton'sche Naherungemethode, Monatsh, Math. Phys. 6, 291-302 (1895).

WALLIS, J. ‘De algebra tractatue... p. 1-482 of vol. 2 of Wallis! Opera Mathematica, Oxford, 1695,

WAGNER, W. Bestimmung der Genauigkeit des Newton'schen Verfahrens. Berlin, (Latin, 18553 German,
1860). Quoted from Ency. Math. Wiss. Vol. 1, p. 43h.

WARD, G. W. © Successive approximtions to (/a. Math. Gaz. 17, 52-53, 127 (1933).

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations. Glasgow and London, Blackie, 1942,
Pe 9hb~95.

B. Root-Squaring and Allied Methods

BAIRSTOW, L. Applied Aerodynamics. New York, Longmans, 1920, p. 551-560.
BIZDERBACH, Le and BAUER, ¢. Yorlesungen Bher Algebra, Rerlin, Teubner, 1928, p. 17h-187.

“FF

BRODETSKY, S. and SMEAL, G. On Graeffe's method for complex roots of algebraic equations. Proc.Camb.
Phil. Soc. 22, 83-87 (192i).

CARVALLO, M. E. Méthode pratique pour la résolution numérique complete des équations algébriques
ou transcendantes. Paris, Nony, 189%, 32 p.

DANDELIN, G. Sur la résolution des squations mmériques. Mém, Acad. Roy. Bruxelles 3, Af (1926).

ENCKE, J. F. ae Aufloeung der numerischen Gleichungen. Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 22,193-
248 (1841).

GRIFFE, C. H. Die Auflosung der hoheren numerischen Gleichungen,.. Zurich, Schulthess, 1837, 34 p.

LEVI, D. On the approximate solution of transcendental equations represented by Taylor series. Math.
Notae 3, 1-40 (1943).

OSTROWSKI, A. Recherches sur la méthode de Graeffe et les zéros des polynomes et des séries de
Laurent. I-IV. Acta Math. 72, 99-257 (1940).

RUNGE, C. Gleicmmngen, Separation und Approximation der Wurzeln, ‘Eney. Math. Wiss. Leipzig,
Teubner, 1899, I B 3a, section 14, p. 440-146.

RUNGE, C. and Konic, BH. Yorlesungen Uber numerisches Rechnen. Berlin, Springer, 1924, pe 164-175.
RUNGE, C. Praxis der Gleichungen. Berlin, de Gruyter, 2nd ed. 1921, 172 p.
351

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SAN JUAN, R. Complements to Graeffe's method for the solution of algebraic equations, Revista Mat.
Hisp.-Amer, (3) 1, 1-14 (1939).

SCARBOROUGH, J. B. Numerical Mathematical Analysis. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1930, chap. X.

SEBASTIAO e SILVA, J. Sur une méthode d'approximation semblable & celle de Graeffe. Portugaliae
Math, 2, 271-279 (1941).

WHITTAKER, E. T, and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations. Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1942,p.
106-119,

C. Miscellaneous Methods.

AITKEN, A. C, On Bernoulli's numerical solution of algebraic equations. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. 46,
289-305 (1926). -

BERNOULLI, D. Observationes de seriebus quae formantur ex additione vel subtractione quaecunque
terminorum se mituo consequentum, ubi praesertim earundem insignis usus pro inveniendis
100 (17 oe aequationum algebraicarum ostenditur. Comment. Acad. Sci. Petropol. 3, &8&5—
100 (1732).

COHN, F. Ueber die in recurrirender Weise gebildeten GrSssen und ihren Zusammenhang mit den algebra-
ischen Gleichungen, Math. Ann. 44, 473-538 (1894).

COLLATZ, L. ‘Das Hornersche Schema bei komplexen Wurzeln algebraischer Gleichungen. Zeit. Angew.
Math. Mech, 20, 235-236 (1940).

CORNOCK, A. F. and HUGHES, J. M. The evaluation of the complex roots of algebraic equations. Phil.
Mag. (7) 3h, 314-320 (1943).

EAGLE, A. Series for all the roots of a trinomial equation. Amer, Math. Month. 46, 422-425 (1939).

EICHLER, M. Zur namerischen Lésung von Gleichungen mit reellen Koeffizienten. Jour. Reine Angew.
Math. 184, 124-128 (1942).

EULER, L. Introductio in analysin infinitorum, Lausanne, Bosquet, 1748, xvi + 320 p., chap. 17.
FOURIER, J. Be Je Analyse des équations déterminées. Paris, Didot, 1830, xxiv + 258 p. » Pe 68-86.

FRAZER, R. A., DUNCAN, W. J. and COLLAR, A. R. Elementary Matrices and Some Applications to Dynamics
and Differential Equations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1938, p. 148-151.

FURSTENAU. Darstellung der reellen Wurzeln algebraischer Gleichungen durch Determinanten der Coef-
ficienten. Marburg, 1860. Quoted from Aitken, A. C., Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. 46,1926, p. 303.

HITCHCOCK, F. L. Algebraic equations with complex coefficients. Jour, Math, Phys, (M.I.T.) 18,202-
210 (1939).

HITCHCOCK, F. Le An enon on the G.C.D. method for complex reots. Jour, Math. Phys. (M.1.T.)
23, 69-7h (1944).

HORNER, W. G. A new method of solving numerical equations of all orders, by continuous approxi-
nove (ase), Trans. Roy. Soc. London 109 Part 2, 308-335 (1819); also Ladies Diary 135,
i .

HORNER, W. a Gs bn popular methods of approximation. Math. Repository, New Series, 4 Part 2, 131-
136 (1819).

HORNER, W. G. © Horae mathematicae. Math. Repository, New Series, 5 Part 2, 21-75 (1830).

JACOBI, C. J. G. Observatiunculae ad theoriam aequationum pertinentes, V. Quomodo regula Ber-
noulliana ad investigandas radices, quae maximam aut minimam sequuntur, extendi potest.
Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 13, 349-353 (1835).
352

BIBLIOGRAPHY

KEMPNER, Me Je ) On the complex roots of algebraic equations. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 41, 809-843
1935).

KONIG, J. Ueber eine Eigenschaft der Potenzreihen. Math. Ann. 23, 47-449 (1884).

KRAFFT, Me Byer ein Zulersches Verfahren zur Wurzelberechnung. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 49, 312-315
1941).

LAGRANGE, J. L. De la résolution des équations numériques de tous les degrés. Paris, Duprat, 1798
chap. 3.

LAGUERRE, E. Sur une méthode pour obtenir par approximation les racines d'une équation algébrique
qui a toutes ses racines réelles. Oeuvres de Laguerre, vol. 1, Paris, Gauthier-Villars,
1998, p. 87-103.

LEWIS, A. ‘ e a solution of algebraic equations by infinite series. Nat, Math. Mag. 10, 80-95
1935).

LIN, SHIH-NGE. A method of successive approximations of evaluating the real and ¢ lex roots of
cubic and higher-order equations. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 20, 231-242 (29n15 ‘

LIN, SHTH-NGE. A method for Minding reots of algebraic equations, Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 22,
60-77 (1943).

NAEGELSBACH, H. Studien zu Furstenau's neuer Methode der Darstellung und Berechnung der Wurzeln
algebraischer Gleichungen durch Determinanten der Coefficienten, Archiv Math. Phys.: 59,
147-192 (1876); 61, 19-85 (1877).

NIEWENGLOWSKI, B. Cours d!algabre, Parie, Armand Colin, vol. 2, 7th ed. 1916, 570 Pe» Ps 417-458.
PERRON, 0. Algebra. Berlin, de Gruyter, vol. 2, 2nd ed. 1933, vill + 260 p., p. 47-56.

RUNGE, C. Gleichungen, Separation und Approximation der Warteln, Ency, Meth, Wies. Leipzig,
Teubner, 1899, I B 3a, Pe 439-40. .

SHARP, H. &. A comperison of methods for evaluating the complex roots of quartic equations. Jour.
Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 20, 243-256 (1941).

STERN, M. A. Theorie der Kettenbruche und ihre Anwendung, Jour. Reine Angew. Meth. 10, 1,2~168,
277-306 (1634).

VINCENT, a Note sur la resolution des équations numériques. Jour. Math. Pures Appl. 1, 341-372

WEYL, H. Randbemerkungen zu Hauptproblemen der Mathematik. Math. Zeit. 20, 130-150, espec. 142-146

(1924).

WIENER, A. Die Berechnung der reelien Wurzein der quartinomischen Gleichungen. Zeit. Math. Phys.
31, 65-87 (1886).

YOUNG, J. R. On the Theory and Solution of Algebraical Equations, London, Souter, Ist ed. 1835,

9, THE ZEROS OF TRANSCENDENTAL BQUATIONS

A. Iterative Methods (see also under 8A)

BOURLET, C. Sur le probleme de liitération. Ann. Toulouse iz, ¢ 1-12 (2898).

CAUCHY, A. L. Analyse algébrique. Note III. See Oeuvres completes d'Augustin Cauchy, 2nd series,
vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1897, p. 381-386.
353

BIBLIOGRAPHY

DARY, i. Letter to Newton (August 1674). See Rigaud, S. P. and S. J., Correspondence of Scientific
Men of the Seventeenth Century (Earl of Macclesfield Collection). Oxford, Oxford Univ.
Press, 1841, vol. 2, 365-367.

DeMORGAN, A. Treatise on the Calculus of Functions. (Extracted from the Encyclopedia Metropolitana.)
London, Baldwin and Cradock, 1836, 88 p. .

DeMORGAN, A. Encyclopaedia Metropolitana. 1845, vol. 2, pe 305-389.

FOURIER, J. B. J. Théorie analytique de la chaleur. Paris, Didot, 1822, xxii+ 639 pe, p. 342-346.
FOURIER, J. B. J. Analyse des equations déterminées, Paris, Didot, 1830, xxiv + 258 p., p. Al.
FARKAS, J. Sur les fonctions iteratives. Jour. Math. Pures Appl, 10, 101-108 (1884).

GERMANSKY, B. Notiz uber die Losung von Extremalaufgaben mittels Iteration. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech.
1h, 187 (1934).

GREGORY, J. Letter to Collins (April 1674). See Rigaud, S. P. and S. J., Correspondence of Scientific
Men of the Seventeenth Century (Earl of Macclesfield Collection). Oxford, Oxford Univ.

Press, 1841, vol. 2, p. 255-256.

HALL, N. A. The solution of the trinomial equation in infinite series by the method of iteration.
Nat, Math. Mag. 15, 1-12 (1941).

HEYMANN, W. Uber die elementare Auflosung transcendenter Gleichungen. Zeit. Math. Naturwiss.
Unterricht 29, 1-15 (1898).

ISENKRAHE, C. Boer die Anwendung iterirter Functionen zur Darstellung der Wurzeln algebraischer
und transcendenter Gleichungen. Math. Ann. 31, 309-317 (1888).

TSENKRAHE, C. Das Verfahren der Functionswiederholung, seine geometrische Veranschaulichung und
algebraische Anwendung, Wissenschaftliche Beilage zum Jahresbericht des Kgl.Kaiser—Wilheln
Gymnasiums in Trier. 1897, viii + 113 p.

JULIA, G. Mémoire sur la convergence des séries formées avec les itérdes successives d'une fraction

KING, L. V. On the Direct Numerical Calculation of Elliptic Functions and Integrals. Cambridge,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1924, wili+ 42 p.

KOENIGS, % P. ) Recherches sur les substitutions uniformes, Bull, Sci, Math. (2) 7 (1), 340357
1883).

LEGENDRE, A. M. Supplement & ltessai sur la théorie des nombres, seconde (1808) édition. Paris,
Courcier, 1616, p. 28-37.

4

Y, E, Me Sur la convergence des substitutions uniformes. Nouv. Amn, Math.: (3) 16, 306-319
(1897); (3) 17, 75-80 (1898).

LEMERAY, E. M, Sur quelques algorithmes et sur l'itération. Bull. Soc, Math. France 26, 10-15 (1898).

VON MISES, R. and POLLACZEK-GEIRINGER, H. Praktische Verfahren der Gleichungsauflosung. I. Zeit.
Angew. Math, Mech. 9, 58-62 (1929).

MONTEL, P. L'Itération, Univ. Nac. La Plata Publ. Fac. Ci. Fisicomat. Revista (2) 3, 201-211 (1940).
NETTO, E.  Vorlesungen uber Algebra. Leipzig, Teubner, 189%, vol. 1, p. 300-323.

PELLET, A. Caleul des racines réelles d'une équation. C. R. Acad, Sci. Paris 133, 917-918, 1186-
1187 (1901).

PERRIN, S. Sur la séparation et le calcul des racines réelles des équations, C, R. Acad. Sci. Paris
133, 1189-1191 (1901).
354

‘BIBLIOGRAPHY

PINCHERLE, S. Equations fonctionelles. Eney. Sei. Math. II 5 (1) 55~72 (1912).

" = 2 =e. sos Bent as a+
RUNGE, C. and KONIG, H. Vorlesungen iiber Numerisches Rechnen. Berlin, Springer, 1924, p. 155-157.

SANCERY, L. De la méthode des substitutions successives pour le calcul des racines des équations.

SCARBOROUGH, J. B. Numerical Mathematical Analysis. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1930, p. 184-
187, 191-195. ;

SCHROEDER, Gs yreber unendlich viele Algorithmen zur Auflosung der Gleichungen. Math.Ann. 2, 317-365
1870). .

SIEGEL, ¢. L. Iteration of analytic functions. Ann. of Math. (2) 43, 607-612 (1942).

SPOERL, C. 4 ( ye equations in the machine age, Record Amer. Inst. Actuar. 31, 129-149, 490-
5 1942)

VALIRON, G. Sur Ltitération des fonctions holomorphes dans un demi-plan. Bull. Sci. Math. (2) 55,
105-128 (1931).

B. Miscellaneous Methods

AUGE, J. On the zeros of polynomials and Laurent series, (Spanish). Revista Mat. Hisp.-Amer. (4) 3,
176-185, 229-241 (1943).

BLEICK, W. E. Symmetric relations between the eoefficients of reversed power series, Phil. Mag. (7)
33, 637-638 (1942).

BURKHARDT, H. Trigonometrische Reihen und Integrale bis etwa 1850: Darstellung der Worzein von
Gleichungen durch Integrale. Ency. Math. Wiss., Leipzig, Teubner, 1915, II 1 (2) pe 1307-

1311.

CAUCHY, A. L. Legons aur le calcul diffdrentiel. Note: sur la détermination approximative des
racines... Oeuvres complétes d'Augustin Cauchy, (2) vol. 4. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1899,
Pe 573-609.

COHN, F. Ueber die in recurrirender Weise gebildeten Grossen und ihren Zusammenhang mit den

algebraischen Gleichungen. Math. Ann. 44, 473-538 (1894).

CURRY, H. B. The method of steepest descent for non-linear minimisation problems. Quart. Appl. Math.

2, 258-261 (19kb).

DEHN, M. and HELLINGERR, &. On James Gregory's Vera Quadratura. The James Gregory Tercentenary
Memorial Volume. London, Bell, 1939, pe 468-478.

EULER, L. Introductio in analysin infinitorum, tomis prims. Lausanne, Bosquet, 1748, xwi + 320 p.,
section 355, pe 294-295.

EULER,L. De radicibis aequationis infinitae, 0 = 1-2xx/ n(n+1) +24/ n(n4l) (n+2) (043) -x°/ Nee e(nt5) +
eee etc, Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petropol. 9, 19-40 (1791).

FUJIWARA, M. On the zero points of integral transcendental functions of finite genus. Jap. Jour.
Math. 1, 27-28 (1924).

FUJIWARA, M. Uber die Nulistellen der ganzen Funktionen vom Geschlecht Null und Eins. Téhoku Math.
Jour. 25, 27-35 (1925).

GERCEVANOFF, N. Quelques procédés de la résolution des équations fonctionelles linéaires par la
méthode dtitération. C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 39, 207-209 (1943).
355

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GOLOMB, Me 33). and poles of functions defined by Taylor series, Bull, Amer. Math. Soc. 49, 581-592
1943).

HILLMAN, A. P. and SALZER, HE. Roots of sin z = 2. Phil. Mag. (7) 34, 575 (1943).
HURWITZ, A. Uber die Wurzeln einiger transcendenten Gleichungen. Mitt. Math. Ges, Hamburg 2, 25-31
(1

LEEMANN, A. Uber die Inversion des Gaussschen Wahrscheinlichkeits-Integrals, Mitt. Verein Schweiz.
Versich. Math. 38, 15-52 (1939).

LEVI, B. On the approximate solution of transcendental equations represented by Taylor series.
(Spanish). Math. Notae 3, 1-40 (1943).

MEYER, F. Zur Auflosung der Gleichungen. Math. Ann. 33, 511-524 (1889).
PLUMMER, H. C. The numerical solution of a type of equation, Phil, Mag. (7) 32, 505-512 (1941).
POLYA, G. Wher das Graeffesche Verfahren, Zeit. Math. Phys. 63, 275-290 (1914).

PONTRJAGIN, L. On zeros of some transcendental functions, (Russian, English summary.), Bull. Acad,
Sei. URSS. Sér, Math. (Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR) 6, 115-134 (1942).:

RUNGE, C. Entwicklung der Wurzeln einer algebraischen Gleichung in Summen von rationalen Functionen
der Coefficienten. Acta Math. 6, 305-318 (1885).

SCHROEDER, E. Ueber unendlich viele Algorithmen zur Auflosung der Gleichungen, Math, Ann. 2, 317-
365 (1870).

STERN, M. a Ueber die Auflosung der transcendenten Gleichungen, Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 22, 1-62

o

TCHEBOTAROW, N. On the methods of Sturm and Fourier for transcendent functions, C. R. (Doklady)
Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 34, 2-4 (1942).

TCHEBOTAROW, N. On @ particular type of transcendent equations. C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sei,  URSS
(N.S.) 34, 38-41 (1942).

TCHEBOTAROW, N. On entire functions with real interlacing roots. C, R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS
(N.S.) 35, 195-197 (1942).

WHITTAKER, ET. A formila for the solution of algebraic or transcendental equations. Proc. Edin.
Math. Soc. 36, 103-106 (1918).

WHITTAKER, E, T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd, ed. 1942,
p. 120-123.

10. ‘IMPLICIT FUNCTIONS

BIEBERBACH, L. Lehrbuch der Funktionentheorie, vol. I. Leipzig, Teubner, 3rd ed. 1930, p. 195-204.

COPSON, E. T. Introduction to the Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable, Oxford, Oxford Univ.
Press, 1935, p. 121-125.

EAGLE, A. Series for all the roots of the equation (2 - a)™=k(z-b)", Amer, Math. Month. A6,
425-128 (1939).

EAGIE, A. Series for all the roots of a trinomial equation. Amer. Math. Month. 46, 422-425 (1939).

HURWITZ, A. and COURANT, R. Vorlesungen uber Allgemeine Funktionentheorie und elliptische Funktionen.
Berlin, Springer, 1929, xii + 534 p.
356

BIBLIOGRAPHY
=

LAGRANGE, J. Ll. Nouvelle méthode pour résoudre les Squations litterales par le moyen des séries.
Oeuvres de Lagrange, vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1869, p. 1-73.

ie Lagrange, vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier-Villars

PRAFF, J. F. Disquisitiones analyticae maxime ad calculum integralem et doctrinam serierum per-
tinentes, vol. 1, sect, 2. Third paper: Tractatus de reversione serierum, sive de reso-
lutione aequatiomm per series. Helmstedt, Fleckeisen, 1797, 350 p., pe 227-350.

PINCHERLE, S. Gli elementi della teoria delle funzioni analitiche. 1922, p. 239 ff; p. 213.

SCHLOEMILCH, 0. Die allgemeine Umkehrung gegebener Funktionen. Halle, H. W. Schmidt, 1849, 56 pe

WHITTAKER, E. T, and WATSON, G. N. Modern Analysis. New York, Macmillan, Amer. ed. 1943, p. 128-133.

11. HARMONIC ANALYSIS

BERGER, E. Gs ) Harmonische Analyse diskreter Zahlenreihen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 269-272

BRUNT, D. The Combination of Observations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, gnd ed. 1931, x + 239
p., chap. XI, pe 179-205,

CARSE, G. A. and SHEARER, G. A Course in Fourier's Analysis and Periodogram Analysis for the Math-
ematical Laboratory. Edin. Math. Tracts, No. 4. London, Bell, 1915, vili + 66 p.

CONRAD, ¥. Zur Berechnung noherer Glieder der Fourierschen Reihen. Meteorol. Zeit. 36, 160 (1919).

DALE, J. B. The resolution of a compound periodic function into simple periodic functions.Month.
Notices Roy. Astr. Soc. 74, 628-648 (1914).

DANIELSON, G. C. and LANCZOS, C. Some improvements in practical Fourier analysis and their appli-
cation to k-ray scattering from liquids. Jour, Franklin Inst. 233, 365+380, 435-452 (1942).

DIETSCH, G. and ROTZEIG, B. Eine neue Methode 2ur exakten Berechnung der Fourierkoefrizienten.
Beitrage zur Geophysik (Gerlands Beitrage) 38, 276-281 (1933).

KAGLE, A. A practical Treatise on Fourier's Theorem and Harmonic Analysis: for Physicists and Engi-
neers. London, Longmans Green, 1925, xiv + 178 p.

ESPLEY, D. C. Harmonic analysis by the method of central differences. Phil, Mag. (7) 28, 338-352
1

FISCHER-HINNEN, J. Methode zur schnellen Bestimmng harmonischer Wellen.Elektrotech. Zeit, 22, 3%-

398 (1901).
LAGRANGE, J. L. Recherches sur la manitre de former des tables des planétes d'aprés les seules
obsérvations. Csuvres de Lagrange, vol. 6, Paris, Cauthier-Villers, 1973, p. 505-627.

LAGRANGE, J. L. Sur les interpolations, Oeuvres de Lagrange, vol. 7. Paris, 1877, p. 533-553.

LINCOLN, P. M. © Wave form analysis, The Electric Jour. (Publ. by The Electric Club, Pittsburg, Pa.)
5, 386-392 (1908).

LIPKA, J. Graphical and Mechanical Computation. New York, Wiley, 1918, p. 170-208.

LOWAN, A. N, and LADERMAN, J. Table of Fourier coefficients, Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 22, 136-
U7 (1943).

POLLAK, L. re Rechentafeln zur Harmonischen Analyse. Leipzig, Barth, 1926, 22 p. text and 138 p.
tables.

ROSS, M. A. S. Numerical Fourier analysis to twenty-nine harmonics, Nature 152, 302-303 (1943).
357

BIBLIOGRAPHY

RUNGE, C. boer die ae empirischgegebener periodischer Funktionen in Simuswellen, Zeit. Math.

RUNGE, C. ther w° Zerlegung einer empirischen Funktion in Simswellen. Zeit. Math. Phys. 52, 117-
123 (1905).

RUNGE, C. and EMDE, F. Rechnungsformilar zur Zerlegung einer empirisch gegebenen periodischen
Funktion in Sinuswellen, Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1913.

RUSSELL, A. Practical harmonical analysis. Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond. 27, 149-170 (1915).
SCHLAEFKE, K. Zur harmonischen Analyse von Nockenkurven. Luftfahrtforschung 17, 87-88 (1940).
STUMPFF, K. Grundlagen und Methoden der Periodenforschung, Berlin, Springer, 1937, viii + 332 p.

STUMPFF, K. Tafeln und Aufgaben zur harmonischen Analyse und Periodogrammrechnung. Berlin, Springer,
1939, Vii + 17h p.

TAYLOR, H. O. A mechanical process for constructing harmonic analysis schedules for waves having
even and odd harmonics. Phys. Rev. (2) 6, 303-311 (1915).

THOMPSON, S. P. Note on a rapid approximate method of harmonic analysis. Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond. 19,
£43450 (1905).

THOMPSON, S. P, | Nouvelle méthode d'analyse harmonique par la sommation algébrique d'ordonnées dé-
terminées. C, R. Acad. Sci. Paris 153, 88-90 (1911).

THOMPSON, S. P. A new method of approximate harmonic analysis by selected ordinates. Proc. Phys.
Soc. Lond. 23, 334-343 (1911).

TURNER, H. H. The facility of harmonic analysis. Jour. Brit. Astr. Assoc. 18, 250-254 (1908).

TURNER, Meee Tables for facilitating the use of harmonic analysis. London, Humphrey Milford, 1913,
Pe

ZECH, T. na) Analyse mit Hilfe des Lochkartenverfahrens. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 9, 425-
427 (1929). ,

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, London, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1942, p.
260-28).

12. PERIODOGRAM ANALYSIS

ALTER, D. Application of Schuster's periodogram to long rainfall records, beginning 1748, Month.
Weather Rev. 52, 479-487 (192k).

ALTER, D. An examination by means of Schuster's periodogram of rainfall data from long records in
typical sections of the world, Month. Weather Rev. 54, h4-56 (1926).

ALTER, D. The criteria of reality in the periodogram., Month. Weather Rev. 54, 57-58 (1926).

ALTER, Do a i tlaatad simple method of periodogram analysis. Proc, Nat. Acad.Sci. U.S.A. 19, 335-
339 (1933).

BARTELS, J. Random fluctuations, persistence, and quasi-persistence in geophysical and cosmical
periodicities, Terr, Magnetism 40, 1-60 (1935).

BERNSTEIN, F. ter die arithmetischer Ermittlung verborgener Periodizitaten. Zeit, Angew, Math,

BERNSTEIN N. ) Analyse aperiodischer trigonometrischer Reihen, Zeit. Angew, Math, Mech. 7, 476-485
1927).
358

BIBLIOGRAPHY
BROOKS, C. E. P. The difference-periodogram-— a method for the rapid determination of short periodic-
ities. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A105, 346-359 (192k).

BRUNT, D. Periodicities in European Weather. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A225, 247-302 (1925).
See also An investigation of periodicities. Quart. Jour. Roy. Met. Soc. 53, 1-29 (1927).

BRUNT, D. The Combination of Observations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2nd ed. 1931, x + 239
pe, chap. XII, p. 206-231.

BRUNT, D. Harmonic analysis and the interpretation of the results of periodogram-investigations.
Mem. Roy. Met. Soc. 2, No. 15, 48-68 (1928).

CARSE, G. A. and SHEARER, G. A Course in Fourier's Analysis and Periodogram Analysis for the Math-
ematical Laboratory, Edin, Math. Tracts No. 4. London, Bell, 1915, viii+ 66 p.

CONRAD, V. Der Expektanzbegriff von Arthur Schuster. Meteorol. Zeit. 59, 299-306, 389-390 (1924).

GIBB, D. The pericdogram analysis of the variations of SS Cygni. Month. Notices Roy. Astr. Soc. 7h,

678~686 (1914).

HIRAYAMA, S. Note on the method to find the period of a periodic function from equidistant obser-
vations. Proc, Tokyo Math. Phys, Soc. (2) 7, 268-274 (1916).

HOLTZHEY-LINDAU, R. Eine Ausgleichungsbetrachtung, Zeit. Angew. Met. 48, 83-91 (1931).

7 ye Periodographie als Statistisches Problem. Beitr. Physik frei Atmosph. 19, 173-187
1932).

iL
KELLEY, T. Le The evidence for periodicity in short time series. Jour. Amer. Statist. Assoc, 38,
319-326 (1943).

KRASSOWSKI, J. Analyse, au moyen de la méthode de M, Schuster, des périodes de la variation de la
Jatitude, Bull. Internat. Acad. Sci. Cracovie, Cl, Sci. Math. Net. 1909, 543-548 (1909).

LABROUSTE, HH. Analyse des courbes résultant de la superposition de sinuscides. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris
18k, 259-261 (1927).

VON LAUE, M. Ein Satz der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung und seine Anwendung auf die Strahlungstheorie,
Ann. der Phys. (4) 47, 853-878 (1915).

McNISH, A. G. rae of statistical analysis occasionally overlooked. Jour. Franklin Inst. 215

697-703 (1933

vier, 3. Ginstigste Bestimmmng der Umkehrung der Laplace-Transformierten zur Auffindung Ver~
borgener Periodizitaten. Dissertation, Gottingen, 1932, 45 p.

REINSBERG, C. Beitrage zur Theorie der Aufsuchung versteckter Periodizitéten. Astr. Nachr, 246,
421-438 (1993).

REINSBENG, C. Zur Theorie der Exponentialperiodogramme, Astr. Nachr. 252, 336-346 (1934).

RIETZ, H. L. and BAUR, F. Handbuch der Mathemtischen Statistik. Leipzig, Teubner, 1930, vi + 285 p.
RUSSELL, A. Practical harmonical analysis. Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond. 27, 149-168 (1915).

SAVUR, 5. R. ( tyome ified method for calculating periodicities. Proc. Ind. Assoc. Sei, 6, 527-
541 (1931).

SCHUSTER, A. On lunar and solar periodicities of earthquakes. Proc.Roy.Soc.Lond. 61, 455-465 (1897).

SCHUSTER, A. The investigation of hidden periodicities. Terr, Magnetism 3, 13-41 (1898).

SCHUSTER A. The nariodosram of masnetie declination as tained from the records of the Greemwich

SVN Ve. Ot of] oprainen rrom ene recores 6 peormmen

Observatory during the years 1871-1895. Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc. 18, 107-135 (1900).
359

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SCHUSTER, A. The periodogram and its optical analogy. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A77, 136-140 (1906).
SCHUSTER, A. On the periodicities of sun spots. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A206, 69-100 (1906).

STERNE, T. E. and CAMPBELL, L. - Properties of the light-curve of $$ — Cygni. Ann. Harvard Coll,
Obs. 90, No. 6, 189-206 (1934). :

STUMPFF, K. Tafeln und Aufgaben zur harmonischen Analyse und Periodogrammrechnung. Berlin, Springer,
1939, vii+174 p. .

STUMPFF, K. Grundlagen und Methoden der Periodenforschung. Berlin, Springer, 1937, vii + 332 p.

TURNER, H. H. grables for Facilitating the Use of Harmonic Analysis. Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press,

TURNER, H. H. On double lines in periodograms. Proc. 5 Internat. Math. Congr. vol. 2. Cambridge,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1913, p. 177-181.

WALKER, G. T. On periodicity. Quart. Jour. Roy. Met. Soc. 51, 337-346 (1925).

WALKER, Ge T. On periodicity and its existence in European weather. Mem, Roy. Met. Soc. 1, Now 9,
119126 (1927).

WALKER, G. T. On periodicity iii. Criteria for reality. Mem. Roy. Met. Soc. 3, No. 25, 97=101(1930).
WALKER, G. T. On periodicity in series of related terms. Proc, Roy. Soc. Lond. A131, 518-532 (1931).
WORTHING, A. G. and GEFFNER, J. Treatment of Experimental Data. New York, Wiley, 1943, iv + 342 p.

13. FINITE DIFFERENCES

ABRAMOWITZ, M. Note on the computation of the differences of the Si(x), Ci(x), Ei(x) and ~Ei (=x)
functions, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 46, 332-333 (1940).

ADAMS, C. R. Bibliography, supplementary to Nérlund's bibliography on the calculus of finite differ-
ences and difference equations, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 37, 383-1,00 (1931).

ANDOYER, H. Calcul des differences et interpolation. Vol. I, part 21 in 1(4) fase. 1 of Ency. des
Sci, Math., 1906, p. 47-160.

BENNETT, H. F. Computation of polynomial functions by summation of finite differences. Jour. Opt.
Soc. Amer. 33, 519-526 (1943).

BEZOUT, E. Théorie générale des équations algébriques. Paris, P. D. Pierres, 1779, xxviii + 471 p.
p. 1-19.

BLEICH, F. and MELAN, E. Die gewohnlichen und partiellen Differenzengleichungen der Baustatik,
Berlin, Springer, 1927. Chap. 1, p. 1-34.

BOOLE, G. A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences, London, Macmillan, 3rd ed. J. F. Moulton
1880. Reprinted New York, Stechert, 1931, xii+ 336 p.

BOSSUT, C. © Différence. Encyclopédie méthodique, mathématiques, Paris, 1, 512-520 (1789).

BRIGGS, H. Trigonometria Britannica: sive De doctrina triangulorum libri duo. Gouda, Rammasenius,
1633, 110 p., liber prims, cap. xii, p. 35-40.

BURN, J. and BROWN, E. H. Elements of Finite Differences... London, Layton, 2nd ed. 1915, 289 p., p.
1-73.

CARMICHAEL, R. A Treatise on the Calculus of Operations: Designed to facilitate the processes of
the Differential and Integral Calculus and the Calculus of Finite Differences. London,Long-
mans, 1855, xii + 170 p., pe 137152.
360

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CASORATI, F. Il caleolo delle differenze finite interpretato ed accresciuto di nuovi teoremi a
sussidio principalmente delle odierne ricerche basate sulla variabilita complessa. Ann.Mat.
Pura Appl. (2) 10, 10-43 (1880-1862).

COTES, R. Canonotechnica sive Constructio tabularum per differentias. See Opera Miscellanea Rogeri
Cotes, Cambridge, 1722, 125 p., p. 35-71 (Publ. with but paged separately from Harmonia
mensurarwil. ) «

DeMORGAN, A. The Differential and Integral Calculus. London, Baldwin, 1642, xx + 849 Dey P» 71-85,
253- .

DZIOBEK, O. Vorlesungen ber Differential-und Integralrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 1910, x + 648 pe
EMERSON, W. The Method of Increments. London, J. Nourse, 1763, viii + 147 p.

ENCKE, J. F. Ueber mechanische Quadratur. See Gesammelte mathematische und astronomische Abhandlungen
von J. F. Encke, vol. 1. Berlin, Dummler, 1888, 211 p., p. 21-60.

EULER, L. Institutiones calculi differentialis. St. Petersbourg (Leningrad), 1755, xxiv + 88 p.

FORSYTH, C. H. An Introduction to the Mathematical Analysis of Statistics. New York, Wiley, 1924,
vii + 241 p., chap. 2, p. 12-32,

GAU, E. P. Caleuls numériques et graphiques. (Coll. Armand Colin, No. 60) Paris, Colin, 1925, 206 p.

GIBB, D. A Course in Interpolation and Numerical Integation for the Mathematical laboratory. Edin.
Math, Tracts No. 2. London, Bell, 1915, viii + 9 p.

GRANT, J. D. Notes on the Calculus of Finite Differences. Ann Arbor, Edwards Bros., 1926, 94 p.
mimeo.

HANSEN, P. Ae Relationen einestheils zwischen Summen und Differenzen und anderntheils zwischen
Integralen und Differentialen. Abh. Ges. Wiss. Leipzig 7, 506-583 (1865).

HERSCHEL, J. F. W. A Collection of Examples of the Applications of the Caleulus of Finite Differ-
ences, Cambridge, Deignton, 1626, v +171 p.

HYMERS, J. A Treatise on Differential Equations and on the Calculus of Finite Differences. London,
Longmans, 2nd ed. 1858, viii + 318 p., second treatise, 139 p.

JARRET, T. An Essay on Algebraic Development... and in the Calculus of Finite Differences. Cambridge,
Deighton, 1831, iv +192 p., ps» 40-65.

JOLLEY, L. B. W. Summation of Series. London, Chapman and Hali, 1925, xi + 232 p.

JORDAN, C. Statistique Mathématique. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1927, xvii + 344 p.

JORDAN, C. Calculus of Finite Differences. Budapest, Eggenberger Book Shop, 1939, xxi + 654 p.
KOWALEWSKI, G. Interpolation und genaherte Quadratur. Leipzig, Teubner, 1932, vi + 146 p.

LACROIX, S. F. Traité du Calcul Différentiel et du Calcul Intégral. Troisiéme Partie. Des Différ-
ences et des Séries. Paris, Courcier, 2nd ed. 1819, xxiv + 776 p.

LACROIK, S. F. Traité Elémentaire de Calcul Différentiel et de Calcul Intégral, vol.2.Paris, Mallet~
Bachelier, 6th ed. 1862, vili+ 491 p., p. 1-104.

DE LAGNY,T. F. Méthodes nouvelles pour former et résoudre toutes les équations. Hist .Acad.Sei. Paris
1705, 277-300 (1705).

DE LAGNY,T. F. Traité des progressions arithmétiques de tous les degrés. Hist. Acad. Sei, Paris

LAGRANGE, J. L. | Sur une nouvelle espece de calcul relatif & la différentiation et ‘A l'intégration.
Oeuvres de Lagrange, vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1869, p. 439-476.
361

BIBLIOGRAPHY
LAPLACE, P, S. Théorie analytique des probabilites, 3rd ed., book 1. Oeuvres completes de Laplace,
vol. 7. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1686, p. 7-180. ;
LAPLACE, P. S, Mémoire sur la usage du calcul aux différences partielles dans la théorie des suites.
Oeuvres, vol. 9, 1893, p. 311-335. See also Mémoire sur les suites. Oeuvres, vol. 10, 1894,
p. 1-89.
LAURENT, H. Traité dtAnalyse, vol. 1. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1885, xi + 392 p., p. 97-118.

LEGENDRE, A. M. Exercices de calcul intégral, vol. 2. Paris, Courcier, 1817, xx + 5u4 Dp. » Pe72-%,
131-136.

LEGENDRE, 4. M. Traité des fonctions elliptiques et des intégrales Euleriennes. Vol.2.Paris, Huzard
Courcier, 1826, viii+ 596 p., p. 1-120,

LEHMER, D. He On the maxima and minima of Bernoulli polynomials. Amer, Math. Month. 47, 533-538
(1940).

LIDSTONE, G. J. Notes on interpolation. Jour. Inst, Actuar. 71, 68-95 (1941).

-LOWAN, A. N. On the computation of the second differences of the Si(x), Ei(x) and Ci(x) functions.
Bull, Amer. Math. Soc. 45, 583-588 (1939).

MARKOFF, A. A. Differenzenrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 18%, v +194 p.

MIKELADZE, S, Uber dividierte Differenzen mit wiederholten Argumentwerten. Trav. Inst. Math.
Tbilissi (Trudy Thiliss. Mat. Inst.) 9, 49-60 (1941).

DE MOIVRE, A. De fractionibus algebraicis radicalitate immmnibis ad fractiones simplicores reducendis
deque summandis terminis quarumdam serierum aequallo intervallo a se distantibus. Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 32, 162-178 (1722-1723).

DE MOIVRE, A. Miscellanea analytica de seriebus ed quadratis. London, Tonson and Watts, 1730.

DE MONTMORT, Ay R. De seriebus infinitis tractatus. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 30, 633-675 (1717=
1719).

MOUTON, G. Observationes diametrorum Solis et Lunae... Book III, chap. 3: De nonmullis numerorum
proprietabus. Lyon, Liberal, 1670, p. 268-395.

NEWTON, I. Methodus differentialis. In vol. 1 of Isaaci Newtoni Opera... Samuel Horsley,ed.London,
J. Nichols, 1779, p. 521-528.

NICOLE, F, Traité du calcul des differences finies. Hist. Acad. Sci. Paris: 1717, 7-21; 1723, 20-
37, 181~198; 1724, 138-158,

NORLUND, N. E. Vorlesungen ber Differenzenrechnung, Berlin, Springer, 1924, ix + 551 p.

NORLUND, N. E. Sur la "Somme" d'une fonction. Mém. des Sci, Math., Fasc. 24, Paris, Gauthier-
Villars, 1927, 5h pe.

PASCAL, E. Calcolo delle variazioni e calcolo delle differenze finite, Part 3 of Lezioni de calcolo
infinitesimale. Milan, Hoepli, 1897, xii + 330 p., p. 207-330.

PERL, E. Untersuchungen liber Differenzenkoefficienten erster und zweiter Art...(Koenigsberg Diss.).
. Leipzig, Hoffman, 1911, 126 p.

PINCHERLE, 5S. and AMALDI, U. Le operagzioni distributive e le loro applicazioni all' analisi. Bologna,
Zanichelli, 1901, xii + 490 p.

DE PRONY, G. C. Cours d'analyse appliquée & la mécanique. Jour. Ecole Polytech. Paris: 1 (1), 107-
119; 1 (2), 1-233 1 (3), 209-273; 1 (4), 459-569 (1796-1797).

RICHARDSON, L. F. The deffered approach to the limit I, Single lattice. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.
A226, 299-349 (1927).
362
BIBLIOGRAPHY

RUSSELL, W. H. L. On the caleulus of finite differences. Mess. of Math. (2) 11, 33-36 (1881-1888).

SALZER, H. E. Table of coefficients for differences in terms of derivatives. Jour. Math, Phys.
(M.I.T.) 23, 210-212 (1944).

SCHLOMILCH, 0. Theorie der Differenzen und Summen. Halle, Schmidt, 1848, v + 241 p.
SCHWEINS, F. Theorie der Differenzen und Differentiale. Heidelberg, 1825, vi + 666 p., p. 1-113.

SELIWANOFF, D. Lehrbuch der Differenzenrechnung. Vol. 13 of Teubners Sammlung von Lehrblchern.
Leipzig, Teubner, 1904, vi+ 92 p.

STEFFENSEN, J. F. Note on divided differences. Danske Vid. Selsk, Math.-Fys. Medd., 17,No. 3, 12 p.,
1939.

STIRLING, J. Methodus differentialis Newtoniana illustrata. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond.30, 1050-
1070 (1717-1719).

STIRLING, J. Methodus differentialis: sive Tractatus de summatione et interpolatione serierum
infinitarum. London, Whiston and White, 1754, iv + 154 p.

STUDNICKA, F. J.  Beitrage zum Operationscalcul, Sitzber. bohm. Ges. Prag 1671, 39-43 (1871).
STURM, C. Cours d'Analyse, vol. 2. Paris, Mallet~Bachelier, 1859, p. 231-257.
TAYLOR, B. Methodus incrementorum directa ed inversa. London, Innys, 1717, vi+ 119 p.

TAYLOR, B. De seriebus infinitis tractatus. Appendix, qua methodo diversa eadem materia tractatur.
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 30, 676-689 (1717-1729).

TIMERDING, H. E. Differenzenrechmmng, Chap. 9, vol . 1 (1) of Pascal's Repertorium der hoheren Ana-
lyse, Leipzig, Teubner, 2nd ed. 1910.

LE VERRIER, U. J. Recherches astronomiques. Ann. de l'Observ, Paris, 1, 122-128, 151-154 (1655).

14. DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS
BIRKHOFF, G. D. Note on linear difference and differential equations, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci, U.S.A.
27, 65-67 (1941).

BLEICH, F. and MELAN, 5. Die gewohnlichen und partielien Differenzengleichungen der Baustatik.
Berlin, Springer, 1927, vii + 350 p. :

BOHMER, Pp, E. Differenzengleichungen und Bestimmte Integrale. Leipzig, Koehler, 1939, vi + 148 p.

CHARLES, J. A. C. Intégral (Caleul intégral des équations en différences finies), Ency. Meth.,
Math. Vol. 2, p. 221-225. Paris, 1789.

COURNOT, M. § Traité élémentaire de la théorie des fonctions et du calcul infinitdsimal,vol.2.Paris,
Hachette, 2nd ed. 1857, 533 p., Pe 431-480.

FUNK, P. Die linearen Differenzengleichungen und ihre Anwendung in der Theorie der Baukonstruktionen.
Berlin, Springer, 1920, 84 p.

GERONIMWUS, J. Sur quelques équations aux différences finies et les systémes correspondants des
polynomes orthogonaux. C. R. (Doklady) Acad, Sci, URSS (N.S.) 29, 536-538 (1940).

- HEYMANN, W. Studien uber die Transformation und Integration der Differential- und Differenzen-
gleichungen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1891, x+ 436 p.

ISAACS, R. P, A finite difference function theory. Univ. Nac. Tucumin, Revista A. 2, 177-201 (1941).
363

BIBLIOGRAPHY

JORDAN, C. Calculus of Finite Differences. Budapest, 1939. (See sect. 13, Jordan, C.).

LANCASTER, 0. E. Sequences defined by non-linear algebraic difference equations. Ann. of Math. (2)
42, 251-280 (1941).

LAURENT, P. M. Traité d'analyse. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1890, vol. 6. (Calcul intégral. Equations
différentielles partielles, iv + 339 p.).

NORLUND, N. E. Vorlesungen liber Differenzenrechnung. Berlin, Springer, 1924, ix + 551 p.
OLTRAMARE, G. Calcul de généralisation. Paris, Hermann, 1899, viii + 191 p.
PASCAL, E. Repertorium der hoheren Mathematik. Art. by Guldberg, vol. I,, p. 555-560.

RACLIS, R. Solution principale de 1'équation linéaire aux différences finies, Acta Math.55, 277-.
394 (1930).
SPOERL, C. A. A fundamental proposition in the solution of simltaneous linear equations, Trans.

Actuar, Soc. Amer. 44, 276-288 (1943).
SPOERL, C. A. Difference-equation interpolation. Trans. Actuar. Soc. Amer. 44, 289-325 (1943).

WEINNOLDT, E. H. F. Uoer Funktionen welche gewisse Differenzengleichungen n, Ordnung Genuge leisten
(Diss., Kiel). Kiel, Lipsius and Tischer, 1885, 41 p.

15. DIRECT INTERPOLATION
A. Functions of a Single Variable

ABASON, E. Sur ltapproximation minimum d'ordre n sur un ensemble de n + 2 points. Bull. Sci. Ec.
Polyt. Timigoara 3, 64-67 (1930).

ABASON, E. Sur la condition pour que n+ 2 points soient situés sur une parabole du n-dame degré.
Bull. Soc. Sei. Cluj 5, 188-190 (1931).

AITKEN, A. C. On a generalisation of formilae for polynomial interpolation. Jour. Inst. Actuar.
61, 107-112 (1930).

AITKEN, A. C. On interpolation by iteration of proportional parts, without the use of differences.
Proc, Edin. Math. Soc. (2) 3, 56-76 (1932).

AMPERE, A. M. Essai sur un nouveau mode d'exposition des principes du calcul différentiel, du calcul
aux différences et de l'interpolation des suites considerées comme dérivant d'une source
commne, Ann, Math. (Gergonne) 16, 329-349 (1825-26).

ANDOYER, H. Calcul des differences et interpolation. Vol. I, part 21 in 1 (4), Fasc. 1 of Ency. des
Sei. Math., 1906, p. 47-160.

ARBOGAST, L. F. A. Du calcul des dérivations. Strasbourg, Levrault,1800, xxii+ 404 p., p. 375-h0h.

BAUSCHINGER, J. Interpolation. Part I D 3 of Ency. der Math. Wiss., I(2)., Leipzig, Teubner, 1901,

BAUSCHINGER, J. Tafeln zur theoretischen Astronomie. Leipzig, Engelmann, 1901, iv + 148 p.
BELARDINELLI, G. Tl problema dell'interpolazione. Rend. Sem. Mat. Fis. Milano 3, 13-28 (1930).

BENNETT, A. Ae The interpolational polynomial, Chap. 1 of Numerical Integration of Differential
Equations, (Report of Committee on Numerical Integration). Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No. 92,
364
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIERMANN,O. Vorlesungen uber mathematische Naherungsmethoden, Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1905, ix + 227p.,

Pe 92-169.

BLANCH, G. and RHODES, I. Seven=point Lagrangian integration formulas, Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.)
22, 204-207 (1943).

BOOLE, G. A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences. London, Macmillan, 1860, iv + 248 p.

BOYER, J. Osculatory interpolation in practice, Record Amer, Inst. Actuar.: 31, 337-350(1942)3 32,

BRAUNSCHMIDT, 0. Uber Interpolation. Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 185, 14-55 (1943).

CAJORI, F. A History of Mathematical Notations. Vol. 2. Chicago, Open Court, 1929, xviii + 367 p.,
Pe 42-43, 263-267.

CAMP, K. Actuarial note: practical interpolation methods with second-order curves. Trans. Actuar,.
Soc, Amer. 40, 426-439 (1939).

CAUCHY, A. L. Cours d'analyse de l'école royale polytechnique. I partie, analyse algébrique. Note V.
Sur la formule | de Lagrange relative & l'interpolation. Oeuvres completes d'Augustin Cauchy,
2nd series, vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier=Villars, 1897, p. 429-433.

CAUCHY, A. L. Sur les fonctions interpolaires. Oeuvres complétes d'Augustin Cauchy, 1st series,
vol. 5. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1885, p. 409124.

CHARLES, J. A. C. Interpolation (mathématiques et physique). Ency. Meth.,Math. Vol. 2, p. 233-237,
Paris, 1789.

CLAUSEN, T. Uber mechanische Quadraturen. Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 6, 287-289 (1830).

COMRIE, L. Je Interpolation and Allied Tables. Reprint from the Nautical Almanac for 1937. London,
H. M, Stationery Office, 1936, 45 p.

CROUT, P. D. A method for deriving formilas of interpolation. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.)8, 18-55,
119-128 (1929).

tO LiYAT

DAVIS, H. T. Tables of the Higher Mathematical Functions, vol. 1. Bloomington, Indiana, Principia
Press, 1933, xidi+ 377 pe, pe 65-10.

DeMORGAN, A. The Differential and Integral Calculus. London, Baldwin and Cradock, 1842, Chap. 18,
Pe 542-560.

" :
DIESTEL, F. Beitrage su der Interpoletionsrechmung. (Gottingen Diss.). Gottingen, Vandenhoeck and

Ruprecht, 1890, 47 p.
ECHOLS, W. H. On some forms of Lagrange's interpolation formula, Ann. of Math. (1) 8, 22-24 (1893).
EGGER, H. Praktische Interpolation. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 22, 362-364 (1942).

ENCKE, J. F. her Interpolation,Gesammelte mathematische und astronomische Abhandlungen von J. F.
Eneke, vol. 1. Berlin, Dumler, 1888, p. 1-20.

ERDOS, P. and TURAN, P. On interpolation. Ann. of Math. (2): 38, 142-155 (1937)3;39, 703-72h (1938);
4l, 510-533 (1940).

EVERETT, J. D. On the algebra of difference tables. Quart. Jour. Pure Appl. Math. 31,357=376 (1900).
EVERETT, J. D. On interpolation formlae. Quart. Jour. Pure Appl. Math, 32, 306-313 (1901).

FAVARD, J. Sur liinterpolation. Bulli. Soc, lath. France 67, 102-133 (1939).

FAVARD, J. ‘Sur l'interpolation, Jour. Math. Pures Appl. (9) 19, 281-306 (1940).
365
BIBLIOGRAPHY

FEJER, L. Uber Interpolation. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen p. 66-91 (1916).
FEJER, L, {oer Interpolation und konforme Abbildung. Nachr, Ges, Wiss, Gottingen p. 319-331 (1918).

FEJER, L. Uber Weierstrasssche Approximation, besonders durch Hermitesche Interpolation. Math. Ann.
102, 707-725 (1929).

FEJER, L. aaa Interpolation und die zugehorigen konjugierten Punkte. Math. Ann. 106, 1-
55 (1932). :

FEKETE, M. Uber Interpolation. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 6, 410-413 (1926).
FELLER, W. On A. CG. Aitken’s method of interpolation. Quart. Appl. Math. 1, 86-87 (1943).

FISHER, R. A. and WISHART, J. On the distribution of error of an interpolated value and on the con-
struction of tables. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 23, 912-921 (1927).

FORSYTH, C. H. An Introduction to the Mathematical Analysis of Statistics. New York, Wiley, 192h.
Chap. 3, Pe 33-55.

FRASER, D. C. Newton's interpolation formas, Jour, Inst. Actuar.?51, 77-106, 211-232 (1919); 52,
117-135 (1921).

FRASER, D. C. Newton's Interpolation Formas. London, Layton, 1927, iv + 95 p.

GIBB, D. A Course in Interpolation and Numerical Integration. Edin. Math. Tracts. No. 2. London,
Bell, 1915, viii + 90 p.

GLOVER, J. Ti. Interpolation, summation and graduation. Chap. 3 of Handbook of Mathematical Sta-
tistics, Boston, Houghton-Mifflin, 1924, p. 34-61.

GONTCHAROFF, HM. Sur quelques séries d' interpolation généralisant celles de Newton et de Stirling.
(Russian. French summary.). Uchenye Zapiski Moskov. Gos. Univ. Mat. 30, 17-48 (1939).

GREVILLE, T. N. E. A generalization of Waring's formula. Ann. Math. Statist. 15, 218-219 (1944).

GRUNWALD, G. Ona convergence theorem for the Lagrange interpolation polynomials. Bull. Amer, Math.
. Sees 47, 271-275 (1941).

GRUNWALD, G. Note on interpolation. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 47, 257-260 (1941).
HADAMARD, J. Cours dtanalyse, vol. I. Paris, Hermann, 1925, p. 132-151.

HEINHOLD, a Sal Interpolation bei ungleichen Tafelabstanden, Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 235-238
1942).

HENDERSON, R. and SHEPPARD, H. N. Graduation of Mortality and Other Tables. Actuarial Studies No.
4. New York, Actuarial Soc. of Amer., 1919, v+ 8 p.

HERMITE, C. Sur la forme d'interpolation de Lagrange. Jour. Reine Angew. Math. 84, 70-79 (1878).
ISSERLIS, L. Note on Chebysheff's interpolation forma. Biometrika 19, 87-93 (1927).

JACKSON, D. The Theory of Approximation. Amer. Math. Soc. Colloquium Publs., vol. 11. New York,
Amer, Math. Soc., 1930, viii + 178 p.

JACKSON, D. Fourier Series and Orthogonal Polynomials, Carus Monograph Series, No. 6. Oberlin, Ohio,
Math. Assoc, Amer., 1941, xii + 234 p.

JOFFE, S. A. 98 awe formulae and central-difference notation, Trans, Actuar, Soc, Amer. 18,
T2- 1917). ;

JORDAN, C. Cours d'analyse de 1'école polytechnique, vol. 2. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 3rd ed. 1913,
705 Peg Po 125-152.
366

BIBLIOGRAPHY

JORDAN, C, Statistique mathématique. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1927, xvii + 344 pe

KAMENETZKY, I, M. Sur l!interpolation au moyen des dérivées et les procédés d'interpolation corres-
pondants. I, II. C. R. (Doklady) Acad, Sci. URSS (N.S.):25, 356-358 (1939); 26, 217-219
(1940).

KING, G. Institute of Actuaries' Text Book of the Principles of Interest, Life Annuities, and As-
surances, and their Practical Application. Part II. Life Contingencies. London, Layton, 2nd

KOWALEWSKI, Ay Newton, Cotes, Gauss, Jacobi. Vier grundlegende Abhandlungen Uber Interpolation und
genahrte Quadratur, Leipzig, Veit, 1917, vi + 104 p.

KOWALEWSKI, G. Interpolation und genaherte Quadratur. Leipzig, Teubner, 1932, v + 146 p.

LAGRANGE, J. L. Sur une méthode particuliere d'approximation et interpolation. Oeuvres de Lagrange,
vol. 5. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1870, p. 517-531.

LAGRANGE, J. Le Sur les interpolations. Oeuvres, vol. 7, 1877, p. 533-553.
LAGRANGE, J. L. Mémoire sur la méthode d'interpolation. Oeuvres, vol. 5, 1870, p. 661-68.
LAURENT, P. M. H. ‘Traité dtanalyse, vol. 3. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1888, 511 p., p. 416-497.

LEVER, E. H. On obtaining the values of life annuities at isolated rates of interest. Jour. Inst.
Actuar. 52, 171-179 (1921).

LIDSTONE, G. J. Notes on Everett's interpolation formula. Proc, Edin, Math. Soc. 40, 21-26 (1921-
1922

Ze
LIDSTONE, G. J. ‘Notes on interpolation. Jour. Inst. Actuar. 71, 68-95 (1941).
LINDOW, M. - Numerische Infinitesimalrechmung. Berlin, Dumler, 1926, viii + 176 p.
DE LOSADA Y PUGA, C. ‘The interpolation forma of Stirling deduced from Taylor's series. (Spanish).

Revista Univ. Catolica Peru 7, 177-186 (1939).

LOSINSKY, S. Sur le procédé d'interpolation de Fejér, C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 24,
318-321 (1939).

LOWAN, A. G ay SALZER, H. E. Formulas for complex interpolation. Quart. Appl. Math. 2, 272-274
19)» :

er: < - i - ~~ - : a 2 — 2 v. ” a otras =.
MIAENNCHEN, FP. Uber ein interpolationsverfahren des jugendiichen Gauss. Joer. Deutsch Math. Verein

28, 80~84 (1919).
MARKOFF, A. A. Differenzenrechnung, Leipzig, Teubner, 18%, v + 194 p.
MAZZONI, P. Su un metodo dtinterpolazione. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 8 2939 (1929).
MAZZONI, P. Alcune applicazioni dei polinomi di Tchebychev. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 8, 246-248 (1929).
MAZZONI, P. Sul metodo d'interpolazione di Tehebychev. Boll. Un. Mat. Ital. 9, 132-142 (1930).
McCLINTOCK, E. A new general method of interpolation. Amer. Jour. Math. 2, 307-314 (1879).

MIRAKYAN, G. ” Approximation des fonctions continues au moyen de polynémes de la forme
: ene teins C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 31, 201-205 (1941).

MONTEL, P. Lecons sur les séries de polynomes & une variable complexe. Coll, Borel, Paris, Gauthier-
Villars, 1910.

NEWTON, I. Methodus differentialis, In vol. 1 of Isaaci Newtoni opera quae exstant omnia, Samuel
Horsley, ed. London, 1779, p. 521-528.
367

BIBLIOGRAPHY

NIEISEN, N, Traité élémentaire des nombres de Bernoulli, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1923, x +398 p.
NORIUND, N. E, Vorlesungen uber Differenzenrechnung, Berlin, Springer, 1924, 1x +551 pe

NORLUND, N. E. Legons sur les séries d'interpolation. Coll. Borel, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1926,
vii + 236 p.

OGURA, K. Sur la théorie de l'interpolation. C. R. Congr. Intern. Math. Strasbourg, 1920, p. 316=
322, Toulouse, Edouard Privat, 1921.

PEANO, G. Residuo in forma de quadratura Cavalieri-Simpson, L'Ens. Math. 18, 124-129 (1916).

PEARSON, K. Tracts for Computers, No. 2, On the Construction of Tables and on Interpolation. Part
I, Uni~variate Tables, Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1920, 70 p.

PIPES, L. A. The method of symmetrical components applied to harmonic analysis. Phil, Mag. (7) 29,
66-7h (1940).

QUADE, W. Abschatzungen zur trigonometriechen Interpolation, Deutsche Math. 5, 482-512 (1941).
RADAU, Re Etudes sur les formes d' interpolation. Paris, Gauthier~Villars, 1891, % p.
RICE, H. 1. The Theory and Practice of Interpolation. Lynn (Mass.), Nichols, 1899, 234 p.

RUTLEDGE, G. The explicit determination of Cotes' coefficients for polynomial area, Jour, Math.
Phys. (M.I.T.) 1, 78-85 (1922).

RUTLEDGE, G. © The polynomial determined by 2n+ 1 points. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 2,47-62(1923).
RUTLEDGE, G. Limiting values of Lagrangean coefficients. Jour, Math. Phys, (M.I.T.) 8, 13-17 (1929).
SAMUELSON, P. A. A simple method of interpolation. Proc. Nat. Acad, Sci, U.S.A. 29, 397-401 (1943).
SHEPPARD, W. F. Interpolation. Encyclopaedia Britannica llth ed., 14, 706-710 (1910).

SHEPPARD, W. F. Mathematics for the study of frequency statistics. Math. Gaz. 15, 232-249 (1930).

SHOHAT, J. Application of orthogonal Tchebycheff polynomials to lagrangean interpolation and to the
general theory of polynomials, Ann, Mat, Pura Appl. 18, 201-238 (1939).

SPOERL, C. A. Difference-equation interpolation, Trans. Actuar. Soc, Amer.: 4h, 289-325 (1943);
45, 70-82 (194). oo

STEFFENSEN, J. F, Interpolation. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1927.

STOCK, J. S. A method of graphic interpolation. Jour, Amer, Statist. Assoc. 34, 70%713 (1939).
TAYLOR, B. Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa, London, Innys, 1717, 118 p.

THIELE, T. N. = Interpolationsrechming. Leipzig, Teubner, 1909, xii +175 p.

VERNOTTE, P. Sur la représentation dtune fonetion expérimentale par une fraction rationnelle. C. R.
Acad. Sci. Paris 213, 433-435 (1941).

WEBSTER, “EB (139) on certain Lagrange interpolation polynomials. Bull, Amer. Math. Soc, 45, 870-
9) ,

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Caleulus of Observations. Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd ed, 1942,
chaps, 1, 2 and 3, also Pe 369=371,

WILLERS, F. A. Benutzung projektiver Skalen zur Unterteilung von Skalen anderer Funktionen. Zeit.
Angew. Math. Mech, 20, 291-292 (1940).
368

BIBLIOGRAPHY
B. Functions of Several Variables

BIERMANN, O. Uber naherungsweise Cubaturen. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 1s, 211-225 (1903).
BROWN, E. H. and BURN, J. Elements of Finite Differences. London, Layton,1915, 289 Pes De 45-61.
ELDERTON, W. P. | Some notes on interpolation in n-dimension space, Biometrika 6, 94-103 (1908).

KRONECKER, L. oer einige Interpolationsformeln fur ganze Functionen mehrerer Variablen (1869). Ges.
Werke, Vol. I, Leipzig, Teubner, 1895, p. 135-41.

LAGRANGE, J. L. Sur une nouvelle espece de calcul relatif & la différentiation et 4 Ltintégration
des quantites variables, Oeuvres de Lagrange, vol. 3. Paris,Gauthier-Villars, 1869, p. 44l-
476.

LAL, D. N. and DASGUPTA, P. N. Interpolation polynomials in two and more variables. Bull. Calcutta
Math. Soc. 32, 7-14 (1940).

LAMBERT, J, He BeytrAge zum Gebrauche der Mathematik und deren Anwendung, Theil III. Anmerkungen
Uber das Einschaiten, Berlin, Buchandlung der Realschule, 1772, p. 66-104.

NARUMI, S. Some formils in the theory of interpolation of many independent variables. TOhoku Math.
Jour, 18, 309321 (1920).

PEARSON, K. On the Construction of Tables and on Interpolation, Part II, Bi-variate Tables. Tracts
for Computers, No. III. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1920, 54 p.

ROURE, H. Sur une generalisation de la série de Lagrange, avec applications & ltastronomie. C. Re
Acad. Sei, Paris 216, 332-353 (19:3).

WHITTAKER, E.T. and ROBINSON,G. The Caleulus of Observations. London,Blackie, 3rd ed.1942, p.371-37h.

16, INVERSE INTERPOLATION, TABULATION AND SUBTABULATION

AITKEN, A. C. On interpolation by iteration of proportional parts, without the use of differences.
Proc. Edin, Math, Soc. (2) 3, 56-76 (1932).

COMRIE, L. J. (a9 ie construction of tables by interpolation. Month. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. 88, 506-
523 (1928).

COMRIE, i. 3. Inverse interpolation, Nautical Almanac, 1937, London, H. M. Statdonery Office, 1936,

PEANO, G. Interpolazione nelle tavole numeriche. Atti Aecad. Sci. Torino 53, 693=716 (1917).

PEARSON, K. Tracts for Computers, No. Il. On the Construction of Tables and on Interpolation. Part
I. Uni-variate Tables. London, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1920, 70 p.

SAIZER, H. E. A new formula for inverse interpolation. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 50, 513-516 (1944).

VAN ORSTRAND CG. E. Inverse interpolation by means of a reversed series. Phil. Mag. (6) 15, 628-638
1

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations. London, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1942, Pp.
53-57, 60-61, 96-98.

17, ‘INTERPOLATION TABLES

lle

1. J. Tables for interpolation to tenths and fifths by the end-figure process. Nautical Alma-
nac, 1931. London, H. M. Stationery Office, 1929, p. 828-859.
369

BIBLIOGRAPHY

COMRIE, L. J. Interpolation and Allied Tables. Reprint from Nautical Almanac for 1937, London, H. M,
Stationery Office, 1936, 45 p.

COMRIE, L. J. and HARTLEY, H. 0. Table of Lagrangian coefficients for harmonic interpolation in
certain tables of percentage points, Biometrika 32, 183-186 (1941).

DAVIS, H. T. Tables of the Higher Mathematical Functions, vol, 1. Bloomington, Indiana, Principia
Press, 1933, xiii + 377 p., pe 101-176.

GLOVER, J. W. Tables of Applied Mathematics in Finance, Insurance, Statistics, Ann Arbor, George
Wahr, 1930, xiii + 678 p., p. 414-433.

HENDERSON, R. and SHEPPARD, H. N. Graduation of Mortality and Other Tables, Actuarial Studies No,
4. New York, Actuar. Soc. of Amer., 1919, vi+ 8&2 p.

HUNTINGTON, E. V. Tables of Lagrangean coefficients for interpolating without differences, Proc.
Amer, Acad. Arts Sci, 63, 4214-437 (1929).

LAMPE, E. Zur mechanischen Quadratur. Jber. Deutsch, Math. Verein 25, 325-332 (1917).
LITTLE, 4, S, A Table of Interpolation Multipliers. London, Rutledge, 1927.

LOWAN, A. N. and SALZER, H. E. Coefficients for interpolation within a square grid in the complex
plane, Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 23, 156-166 (1944).

MATH. TABLES PROJECT (W.P.A.). Tables of Lagrangian Interpolation Coefficients,New York, Columbia
Univ. Press, 1944, xxxvi + 392 p.

RUTLEDGE, G. Explicit determination of Cotes' coefficients for polynomial area, Jour. Math. Phys.
(M.I.T.) 1, 78-85 (1922).

RUTLEDGE, G. The polynomial determined by 2n + 1 points. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.1.T.) 2, 47-62 (1922).
RUTLEDGE, G. Fundamental table for Lagrangean coefficients. Jour, Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 8, 1-12(1929).

RUTLEDGE, G. and CROUT, P. D. Tables and methods of exte tables for interpolation without
ori terences. Mass. Inst, of Tech. Publs. (Dept. of Math.) Ser. 2, No. 176, July, 1930, p.
1 at °

SALZER, H. E. Table of coefficients for inverse interpolation with central differences, Jour. Math.
Phys. (M.I.T.) 22, 210-224 (1943).

SALZER, H. E. Table of coefficients for inverse interpolation with advancing differences. Jour.
Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 23, 75-102 (1944).

THOMPSON, A. d. Table of Coefficients of Everett's Central-Difference Interpolation Formula. Tracts
for Computers, No. 5. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2nd ed. 1943, viii + 32 p.

18, ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSIONS
BARNES, E. W. The asymptotic expansion of integral functions defined by Taylor's series.Phil.Trans.
Roy. Soc. Lond, 206A, 249-297 (1906).

BARNES, E. W. The asymptotic expansion of integral functions defined by generalised hypergeometric
series, Proc, Lond, Math. Soc. (2) 5, 59116 (1907).

BARNES, E. W. A new development of the theory of the hypergeometric functions. Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. (2) 6, 141-177 (1908).
370

BIBLIOGRAPHY

BOLZA, O. Ueber die linearen Relationen zwischen den zu verschiedenen singularen Punkten gehorigen
Fundamentalsystemen von Integralen der Riemann! schen Differentialgleichung. Math. Ann. a2,

526-536 (1893).

BOREL, é. Legons sur les séries divergentes. Coll, de Monographies sur la Théorie des Fonctions.
Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 2nd ed. 1928, 260 p.

FORD, W. B. Studies on Divergent Series and Sumability. Mich. Sei. Series vol. II, New York,
Macmillan, 1916, xi + 194 pe

FORD, W. B. On the behavior of integral functions in distant portions of the plane. Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. 34, 91-106 (1928).

FORD, W. B. The Asymptotic Developments of Functions defined by Maclaurin Series. Univ. of Mich.
Studies, Scientific Series vol. XI. Ann Arbor, Univ. of Mich. Press, 1936, viii + 143 p.

HAAR, A. {ber asymptotische Entwicklungen von Funktionen. Math, Ann. %, 69107 (1927).

JACOBSTHAL, W. Asymptotische Darstellungen von Losungen linearer Differentialgleichungen. Math. Ann.
56, 129-154 (1902).

JEFFREIS, H. On certain approximate solutions of linear differential equations of the second order.
On certain approximate solutions of Mathieu's equation. On the modified Mathieu's equation.
Proc, Lond. Math. Soc. 23, 428-454 (1924).

KNOPP, K. Theory and Application of Infinite Series. (Translation of 2nd German ed., by R.C. Young.).
London, Blackie, 1928, xii + 571 Pe, Pe 520-563.

LANGER, R. E. The asymptotic solutions of ordinary linear differential equations of the second
aso special reference to the Stokes phenomenon. Bull, Amer. Math. Soc. 40, 545-582
(1934).

LENSE, J. Reihenentwicklungen in der mathematischen Physik. Berlin, de Gruyter, 1933, 178 pesPs 1b5=
162

LEROY, E. Sur les séries divergentes et lee fonctions définies par un développement de Taylor. Ann.

Toulouse 2, 317-430 (1900).

LITTLEWOOD, J. E. On the asymptotic approximation to integrai functions of zero order. Proc, Lond.
Math. Soc. (2) 5, 361-410 (1907).

POINCARE, H. Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, vol. 2. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1893,
viii + 479 pe

PUGACHOV, V. S. Evaluation of error of asymptotic representations of integrals of linear differ-
ential equations containing a parameter. (Russian. English summary.}. Appl. Math. Mech.
(Akad, Nauk SSSR. Prikl. Mat. Mech.) 6, 203-208 (1942).

warcow G, N, A Treatise on the Theory of Bessel Functions. Cambridge and New York, Cambridge Univ.

Faraway we nm if

Press (Macmillan), 2nd ed. 1944, vit 80h pe, Pe 194-270.

WHITTAKER, E. T. and WATSON, G. N. Modern Analysis, Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1944, 608 pe,
chap. VIII, pe 150-159.

WIRTINGER, We Einige Anwendungen der Euler-Maclaurinsche Summenformel, insbesondere auf eine
Aufgabe von Abel. Acta Math. 26, 255-271 (1902).

WRIGHT, E. M. The asymptotic expansion of the generalized hypergeometric function. Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. (2) 46, 389-408 (1940).

WRIGHT, E. Mu The asymptotic expansion of integral functions defined by Taylor's series. Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond, 238A, 423-451 (1940).
371

BIBLIOGRAPHY
19. NUMERICAL DIFFERENTATION AND HIGHER DERIVATIVES

BABINI, J. On the application of finite differences to the successive derivation of composite func~
tions. (Spanish), Revista Union Mat, Argentina 8, 160-164 (1942).

BICKLEY, W. G. Formilae for numerical differentiation. Math. Gaz. 25, 19-27 (1941).

BICKIEY, W. G. and MILLER, J. C. P. Numerical differentiation near the limits of a difference table.
Phil. Mag. (7) 33, 1-14 (1942).

BRUNS, H. Grundlinien des wissenschaftlichen Rechnens, Leipzig, Teubner, 1903, viit+159 p. » Pe 62-67.

CRANK, J., HARTREE, D. R., INGHAM, J. and SLOANE, R. W. Distribution of potential in cylindrical
thermionic valves. Proc, Phys. Soc. Lond. 51, 952-971 (1939).

GAUNT, A. The deferred approach to the limit. II, Interpenetrating lattices. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc,
Lond, A226, 350~361 (1927).

HANSEN, P. A. Relationen einestheils zwischen Summen und Differenzen und anderntheils zwischen Inte~
5 oe) Differentialen, Abh, Math. Phys. Klasse Konig. Sachs. Ges. Wiss. Leipzig 7, 507-
583 (1865).

LINDOW, M. Numerische Infinitesimalrechnung. Berlin, Dumler, 1928, viii + 176 p., chap. 2,

LOWAN, A., SALZER, H. E. and HILLMAN, A, A table of coefficients for numerical differentiation.
Bull, Amer, Math. Soc. 48, 920-924 (191.2).

MARKOFF, A. A. Differenzenrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 1896, vi + 194 p. » Pe 20~27,

VON OPPOLZER, T. Lehrbuch zur Bahnbestimmung der Kometen und Planeten, Vol, 2. Leipzig, Engelmann,
1880, p. 16-31. :

SALZER, H, E. Coefficients for numerical differentiation with central differences, Jour. Math,
Phys. (M.I.T.) 22, 115-135 (1943).

SAUER, R. and POSCH, H. Rechnerische Differentiation von Kurven, Zeit. Verein. Deutsch. Ing, 85
195-197 (1941). .

SCHWATT, I. J. An Introduction to the Operations with Series. Philadelphia, Univ. of Penn.Press,
1924, vid + 287 p.

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, Glasgow, Blackie, 1942, p. 62-70.

20. NUMERICAL INTEGRATION OF DEFINITE INTEGRALS
A. Functions of a Single Variable

ABASON, E. Asupra unor formule pentru caleulul cu aproximati al ariilor. Gas. Mat. 36, 41-45 (1930).
ABASON,E. Sur la moyenne des fonctions paraboliques. Bull.Sci. Ec. Polyt. Timigoara 3, 235-24,3(1930).

ACHYESER, N. I. and KREIN, M. G. On some quadrature formas of P, Tschebyscheff and A, Markoff.
(Russian). Memorial volume dedicated to D, A. Grave, Moscow, 1940, p. 15-28,

AUBERT, P. ae Ge Exercices de calcul numérique, vol. 2. Paris, Vuibert, 1920, 246 p.,

BACKMAN, G. Methodik der theoretischen Wiedergabe beobachteter Wachstumsserien, Lunds Univ. Ars~-
skrift 35, No. 8, 20 p., 1939
372
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BENNETT, A. As The interpolational polynomial. Chap. 1 of: Numerical Integration of Differential
Equations. (Report of Committee on Numerical Integration). Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No. 92,
BERKELEY, E. C. Summation as a function of any terms. Record Amer. Inst, Actuar. 29, 314-348 (1940).
BICKLEY, W. G.  Formlae for numerical integration. Math. Gaz. 23, 352=359 (1939).

BERTRAND, J. Traité de caleul différentiel et de calcul intégral. Vol. 2. Calcul intégral. Inté-
grales définies et indéfinies. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1870, p. 331-352.

BIERMANN, 0. Zur naherungeweisen Quadratur und Cubatur. Monatsh, Math. Phys. ls, 226-242 (1903).

BOUNITZKY, E. bens sur la forme d'uler-Maclaurin. Casopis pest. mat. a fys. (Prague) 57, 95~
102 (1928).

BRUNS, H. Grundlinien des wissenschaftlichen Rechnens. Leipzig, Teubner, 1903, vii+159 po, Pe 68~

CASSINA, U. Formole sommatorie e di quadratura ad ordinate estreme. Rend, Ist. Lombardo 72, 225-
274 (1939).
CASSINA, U. Formole sommatorie e di quadratura con lfordinata media. Atti Accad.Sci. Torince 7h,

300-325 (1939).

CASSINA, U. Estensione del teorema di Rolle al calcolo delle differenze ed applicationi. Rend. Ist.
Lombardo 72, 323-332 (1939).

CLAUSEN, T. foer mechanische Quadraturen. Jour. Reine Angew. Math, 6, 287-289 (1830).

CROUT, P. D. A method for deriving formulas for the approximate calculation of integrals. Jour.
Meth, Phys. (M.I-T.): 7, 126-159 (1928); 8, 119-128 (1929).

CROUT, P. D. An application of the invariant area properties of algebraic polynomials to the deri-
vation of formiles for mechanical integration. Jour, Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 8, 200-215(1929).

CROUT, P. D. The approximation of functions and integrals by a linear combination of functions.
Jour, Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 9, 278314 (1930).

CZUBER, E. Vorlesungen Uber Differential- und Integralrechnung, vol, 2. Leipzig, Teubner, 3rd ed.

DANIELL, P. J. Remainders in interpolation and quadrature formlae. Math. Gaz. 2h, 236-2h4 (1940).

DUFTON, A. F. A new method for approximate evaluation of definite integrals between finite limits.
Nature 105, 355, 455-456 (1920).

ENCKE, J. F. Ueber mechanische Quadratur. Gesammelte mathematische und astronomische Abhandlungsn
von J. Fs Encke, vol. 1. Berlin, Dummler, 1888, p. 21-60.

ENCKE, J. F. Ueber eine andere Methode, zu den Formeln der mechanischen Quadratur zu gelangen. Ges.
Abh., vol. 1, p. 61-99 (1888).

ENCKE, J. F. Ueber die Cotes'eschen Integrations-Factoren. Ges. Abh., vol. 1. De 100-124 (1888).

FRANK, P. and VON MISES, R. Die Differential-und Integralgieichungen der Mechanik und Physik, Vol. 1.
Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1930, pe 34-36, 289-292, 394-397, L67-469.

GAU, E. P. Caleuls numériques et graphiques. Collection Armand Colin, No. 60. Paris, Colin, 1925,
vi + 206 pe, pe 107-120,

GERONTMUS , ret . ) On Gauss! and Tchebycheff's quadrature formulas. Bull. Amer, Math. Soc. 50, 217-221,
hh) «
373

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GIBB, D. A Course in Interpolation and Numerical Integration, Edin. Math. Tracts, No. 2.London, Bell,
1915, pe 63-9. .

GIRAUD, G. Sur une méthode pour calculer les intégrales. Bull. Sci. Math. (2) 48, 233-245 (1924).
GIRAUD, G. Sur le calcul numérique des intégrales définies. Bull. Sci. Math, (2) 48, 397-412 (1924).

GROAT, B. F. Mean value of the ordinate of the locus of the rational integral algebraic function of
degree n expressed as a weighted mean of n+l ordinates... Amer, Math. Month. 38, 212-219

GUERONIMUS, J. Le Sur lterreur des quadratures mécaniques de Gauss. Bull. Cl. Sci. Phys. Math.
Kieff 4, 57-66 (1929).

GUERONTIS, is On some quadrature-formlae. Bull, Acad. Sci, URSS (Math. Phys.) (7) 3, 399-408
1930).

HARROLD, 0. G. On the expansion of the remainder in the open-type Newton-Cotes quadrature forma.
Amer. Jour, Math. 59, 275~289 (1937).

HEINE, E. Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen, Vol. 2. Berlin, Reimer, 2nd ed. 1881, p. 1-31.
IGLISCH, R. Bemerkung Uber die Trapezregel: Zusatz. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 10, 616-618 (1930).

IRWIN, J. 0. On Quadrature and Cubature, or on Methods of Determining Approximately Single and Double
Integrals. Tracts for Computers, No. 10. London, Cambridge Univ, Press, 1923.

KLbcEL, GS, Mathematisches Worterbuch. Vol. 4. Leipzig, Schwickert, 1823, p. 123~165.

KOWALEWSKI, A, Newton, Cotes, Gauss, Jacobi. Vier grundlegende Abhandlungen uber Interpolation und
genaherte Quadratur. Leipzig, 1917, vi + 10h p.

KOWALEWSKI, G.  Bemerkung uber die Trapezregel, Zeit. Angew. Math, Mech. 10, 615-616 (1930).

KOWALEWSKI, G. Interpolation und genaherte Quadratur, Leipzig and Berlin, Teubner, 1932, v + 146 p.

LADEN, H. N. Fundamental polynomials of Lagrange interpolation and coefficients of mechanical
quadrature, Duke Math. Jour. 10, 145-151 (1943).

LENSE, J. Reihenentwicklungen in der mathematischen Physik, Berlin, de Gruyter, 1933, p. 107-113.
LINDOW, M. Numerische Infinitesimalrechnung. Berlin, Dumler, 1928, viii + 176 p.,chap. 3.

LOSINSKY, S. Uber mechanische Quadraturen, (Ruesian. German summary.). Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS Ser.
Math. (Izvestia Akad, Nauk SSSR) 4, 113-126 (1940),

LOWAN, A. N. and SALZER, H. E. Table of coefficients in numerical integration formilae. Jour, Math.
Phys. (M.I.T.) 22, 49-50 (1943).

LOWAN, A. N., DAVIDS, N. and LEVENSON, A. Errata to "Table of the zeros of the Legendre polynomials
of order 1-16 and the weight coefficients for Gauss mechanical quadrature forma". Bull,

MAJID, M. A. and CHAPMAN, S,. Approximate formulae for functions expressed as definite integrals.
Phil. Mag. (7) 33, 115-130 (1942).

MARKOFF, A. A. Differenzenrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 1896, chap. 5, 9, 10.

MERRIFIELD, C. We Report on the present state of knowledge of the application of quadratures and
interpolation to actual data, Brit. Assoc. Rep. for 1880, p. 321-378.

MIKELADZE, S. E. Untersuchungen uber Formeln der mechanischen Quadratur, (Russian, German summary.).
Trav. Inst. Math. Thilissi 2, 43-107 (1937).

MIKELADZE, S. E. Quadrature formas using differences (Russian. Georgian summary.). Bull. Acad.
Sci, Georgian SSR 3, 1001-1003 (1942).
374

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MIKELADZE, S. E. On formlas for mechanical cubatures, containing partial derivatives of the inte-
grand. Bull. Acad. Sci. Georgian SSR 4, 297-300 (1943).

VON MISES, R. Einfache Quadraturformel. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 1, 73-7h (1921).
DE MONTESSUS, R. and DADHEMAR, R. Calcul numérique. Paris, Doin, 1911, 248 pe, Pe 139237.

MOORS, B. P. Valeur approximative d'une intégrale définie. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1905, vii + 195
Pp. and tables.

VON OPPOIZER,T. Lehrbuch zur Bahnbestimmmng der Kometen und Planeten, vol.2. Leipzig,Engelmamn, 1880,
vil + 635 Dey Pe 32-68,

PICONE, M. Lezioni di anslisi infinitesimale, Catania, Circ. Mat. de Catania, 1923, vol. 1, part 2,
chap, 5, sec. 2, ps 564-602.

POLYA, G. Uber die Konvergenz von Quadraturverfahren. Math. Zeit. 37, 264-286 (1933).

RADAU, R. tude sur les formles dtapproximation qui servent & calculer la valeur mumérique d'une
intégral définie. Jour. Math. Pures et Appl. (3) 6, 283-336 (1880).

REMES, E. J. Sur certaines classes de fonctionelles linéaires dans les espaces C,, et sur les termes
complémentaires des formiles d'analyse approximative. (Ukrainian. Russiah and French summa-
ry.). Acad. Sci. RSS Ukraine. Rec. Trav. (Zbirnik Prace) Inst. Math., pe 47-82, 1940.

REMES, E. J. Sur les termes complémentaires de certaines formules d'analyse approximative. C. R.
(Doklady) Acad. Sei. URSS (N.S.) 26, 129-133 (1940).

SALZER, H. E. Coefficients for numerical integration with central differences. Phil. Mag. (7) 35,
262-264 (1944).

SCHELLBACH, C. H. Ueber mechanische Quadratur. (Program, Berlin,). Berlin, Mayer and Miller, 1884.

SHOHAT, J. Sur les quedratures mécaniqnes et sur les 2éros des polynomes de Tchebycheff dans un in-
tervalle infini., C. R. Acad. Sci, Paris 185, 597-598 (1927).

SHOHAT, J. and TAMARKIN, J. D. The Problem of Moments, Amer. Math. Soc, Mathematical Surveys,vol.
II, New Tork, Amer. Math. Suc., 1543, xiv + 140 p., chap. 4.

STEFFENSEN, J. F. On the reminder term of certain formas of mechanical quadrature. Skand. Akt-
uarietidskrift 4, 201-209 (1921).

STEFFENSEN, J. F, On a class of quadrature formas. Proc, Intern. Math. Congr. Toronto, 1924, vol.
2. Toronto, Toronto Univ. Press, 1928, p. 837-844.

STEKLOV, V. Sur ltapproximation des fonctions 4 l'aide des polynomes de Tchébychef et sur les quadra-
tures, Bull. Acad. Impériale Sci. (Izvestia Imperatorskoi Akademii Nauk.) (6) 11, 187-218,
535-566, 687-718 (1917).

Te ne eee

= Vee meen end ne De DT =
REM GUGS OUT 465 GUEUTaLUTGS. Buide Ac

Nauk.) (6) 12, 99-118 (1918).

albat AlnAamt 4

do east
SOFC CES AVON LANA AAO

STEKLOV, V. Quelques remarques complémentaires sur les quadratures, Bull.Acad. Sei. Russ. (Izvestia
Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk.) (6) 12, 587-614 (1918).

STEKLOV, V. Sur les quadratures. Bull. Acad. Sci. Russ. (Izvestia Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk.) (6):
12, 1859-1890 (1918)s 13, 65-9 (1919).

STRANSKY, J.  Bemerkung zum oberen Artikel. Aktudrske Védy 1, 61-62 (1930). See Tauber, A,

TAUBER, A. Ueber ein Problem der Naherungsrechnung und die Makeham'schen Rentenwerte. Aktudrské Védy
1, 49-61 (1930).

THIELE, T. No Interpolationsrechnung. Leipzig, Teubner, 1909, xii+ 175 pe, pe 21-28.

PO ee ere - 7 aA _ ee ee ee ee eee ees ees ~ -_ am - ~ ~_ ee a om, are
USPENSKI, d. Vo On the convergence of quadrature formulas related to an infinite interval. Trans.

Amer. Math. Soc. 30, 542=559 (1928).
375

BIBLIOGRAPHY

VAHLEN, T. Konstruktionen und Approximationen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1911, xii + 347 Pes pe 206=214.
VERITY, E. R. Mathematics for Technical Students. London, Longmans, 1924, p. 419-433.
WALTHER, A. Zur numerischen Integration. Skand, Aktuarietidskrift 8, 148-162 (1925).

WALTHER, A. Bemerkungen uber das Tschebyscheffsche Verfahren zur numerischen Integration. Skand.
Aktuarietidskrift 13, 168-192 (1930).

WILLERS, F. A. Numerische Integration. Berlin, de Gruyter, 1923.

WINSTON, C. On mechanical quadrature formilae involving the classical orthogonal polynomials. Ann.
of Math. (2) 35, 658-677 (1934).

WOLFF, C. E. Note on numerical integration. Proc, Edin, Math, Soc. (2) 1, 139-148 (1928).

B. Functions of Several Variables
AITKEN, A. C. and FREWIN, G. L. The numerical evaluation of double integrals. Proc. Edin. Math. Soc.
42, 2-13 (1923-1924).

ARTMELADZE, N. Uber Formeln der mechanischen Kubaturen, (Russian. German summary.). ‘Trav. Inst.
Math, Tbilissi (Trudy Tbiliss, Mat. Inst.) 7, 147-160 (1940).

BIERMANN, 0. ber naherungeweise Cubaturen. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 14, 212-225 (1903).
BIERWANN, O. Zur naherungsweisen Quadratur und Cubatur. Monatsh. Math. Phys. 14, 226-242 (1903).
BURNSIDE, W. An approximate quadrature formila, Mess. of Math. (2) 37, 166-167 (1907-1908).

DAS GUPTA, P. N. On an interpolation formula connected with a definite integral in n-variables,
Bull. Calcutta Math. Soc. 33, 41-44 (1942). ;
SADOWSKY, M. A forma for approximate computation of a triple integral. Amer. Math. Month. 47,

539-543 (1940).
SHEPPARD, W. F, Central-difference formiae, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 31, hk9h88 (1899).
SHEPPARD, W. F. Some quadrature-formuilae. Proc. Lond. Math. Soe. 32, 258-277 (1900).
WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations. Glasgow, Blackie, 1942, p. 37h-375.

21, ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

DIADHEMAR, R, La balistique extérieure. Mém. Sci. Math. faec. 65, 1934, 5h Ps

ANDOYER, H. Sur la méthode de Gauss pour le calcul des perturbations séculaires. C. R. Acad. Sci.
Paris 152, 418-420 (1918).

D'ASCIA, M. Saggio del metodo dei minimi quadrati per 1'integrazione numerica delle equazioni
differenziali lineari. Rend. Accad. dei Lincei Roma (6) 11, 450-457 (1930).

BABAKOV, I. M. Zur Berechnung der hoheren Eigenfrequenzen der Drehschwingungen von reduzierter Welle.
(Russian. German summary.). Jour. Appl. Math. Mech. (Akad, Nauk SSSR.Zhurnal Prikl. Mat.
Mech.) 5, 109=124 (1941).

BABINI, J. Sobre la integracion aproximada de las ecuaciones diferenciales de segundo orden. Atti
Congr. Intern. Bologna 1928, vol. 3. Bologna, Zanichelli, 1930, p. 103-107.
376

BIBLIOGRAPHY

BALLANTINE, J. P. A numerical method of solving differential equations with a remainder. (Abstract).
Bull. Amer, Math. Soc. 32, 195-1% (1926).

BASHFORTH, F. and ADAMS, J. C, An Attempt to Test the Theories of Capillary Action... with an
Explanation of the Method of Integration Employed... Cambridge, Cambridge Univ.Press, 1883,
80 p. +59 p. tables, p. 15-62.

BATEMAN, H. Differential Equations. London, Longmans Green and Co., Longmans Modern Math. Series,
1918, chap. 1, p. 287-295.

BENDIXON, I. Sur le calcul des intégrales a systéme d'équations différentielles par des approxi~
mations successives. Stockh, Akad. Forh. 50, 599-612 (1893).

BENDIXON, I. Sur les courbes définies par des équations différentielles, Acta Math. 24, 1-88 (1900).
BENNETT, A. A. Introduction to Ballistics. Washington, D. C., Govt. Printing Office, 1921.

BENNETT, A. A, Tables for Interior Ballistics, Washington, D. C., 1923.

BENNETT, A. A., MILNE, W. BE. and BATEMAN, H. Numerical Integration of Differential Equations. Bull.
Nat. Res. Council No. 92, 1933, p. 51-87.

BICKLEY, W. G. A simple method for the numerical solution of differential equations. Phil. Mag. (7)
13, 1006-111, (1932).

BICKLEY, W. G. Formalae for numerical differentiation. Math. Gaz. 25, 19-27 (1941).

BIEBERBACH, L. ) Woer neuere Lehrbucher der praktischen Analysis. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 1, 61-67
(1921).

BIEBERBACH, L. Theorie der Differentialgleichungen. Berlin, Springer, 3rd ed. 1930, chap. 2, p. 27-
552

BLISS, G. A. Funetions of lines in ballistics. Trans, Amer. Math. Soc, 21,93-106 (1920).

aYrTceo 9 A ifn tL ae 2or Btentor Relitatia

Bul, We fe me UCL SO ior Ballistics, New

we. John Baler, 101). wit + 198

ro nn.
army © eS a ed re

BODEWADT, U. T. Yon den freien Schwingungen eines Kreiselpendels bei endlichen Auaschlagen, Zeit.
Angew, Math. Mech. 20, 218-234 (1940).

BOUFFARD, J. Balistique extérieure. Nouvelle méthode de calcul et d'étude de la trajectoire d'un
projectile. Paris, Hermann et Cie, Actual, Sci. Ind., No. 907, 1942, 78 p.

BRISTOW, L. Expansion theory associated with linear differential equations and their regular singu-
lar points. Trans. Amer, Math, Soc. 33, 455-474 (1931).

BRUN, V. ter die Durchfuhrung der Bulerschen Differentiation bei Lésung der Differentialgieichung
y' = f(x,y). 8 Skand. Math. Kongr. Stockholm 1934, (1935) p. 80-88.

BRUNS, E. H. Ober eine Differentialgleichung der Storungstheorie. Astr. Nachr. No. 2533, No. 2553,
18

°

BUCKNER, i. Uber eine Naherungslosung der gewohnlichen linearen Differentialgleichung 1, Ordnung.
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 22, 143-152 (1942).

BURRAU, C. Recherches numériques concernant des solutions périodiques d'un cas spécial du probleme
des trois corps. Astr. Nachr, No. 3230: 135, 233-240 (1894); No. 3251: 136, 161-174 (1694).

BUSCHE, E. Zur Integration der ballistischen Hauptgleichung. Deutsche Math. 6, 97-99 (1941).

CALLANDREAU, 0. Sur une équation différentielle de la théorie des perturbations et remarques
relatives aux Nos. 2389 et 2435 des Astr. Nachr. Astr. Nachr. No. 2547 (1881).
CAQUE, J. ‘Méthode nouvelle Ltintégration des équations différentielles linéaires ne contenant

qufune variable indépendante, Jour. Math. Pures Appl. (2) 9, 185~222 (1864).
377

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CAUCHY, A. Le Méthode simple et générale pour la détermination numérique des coefficients que
renferme le développement de la fonction perturbatrice.Oeuvres complétes d!Augustin Cauchy,
ist ser,, vol. 5, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1885, p, 288-310,

CHADAJA, F, G. On the problem of numerical integration of ordinary differential equations. (Russian,
Georgian summary,). Bull, Acad. Sci. Georgian SSR 2, 601-608 (1941).

CHADAJA, F. G. On the error in the numerical integration of ordinary differential equations by the
method of finite differences. (Russian, Georgian summary.), Trav, Inst, Math. Thilissi n,
97-108 (1942).

CHARBONNIER, P. Traité de balistique extérieure, vol. 2. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1927, 797 pey Pe

CHERRY, T. M. Integrals of systems of ordinary differential equations. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 22,
273-281 (1924).

CLEMENTE, P. Maggiorazione dell'errore nel calcolo col metodo dei minimi quadrati della soluzione
periodica di una equazione differenziale, lineare, ordinaria,del secondo ordine. Rendiconti
Accad. dei Linced. Roma (6) 17, 262-264 (1933).

COLLATZ, L. Eine Verallgemeinerung des Differenzenverfahrens fur Differentialgleichungen. Zeit.
Angew. Math. Mech. 14, 350-351 (1934).

COLLATZ, L. Konvergenzbeweis und Fehlerabschdtzung flr das Differenzenverfahren bei Eigenwertprob-
lemen gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen zweiter und vierter Ordnung. Deutsche Math, 2 ’
189-215 (1937).

COLLATZ, L. Schranken fur den ersten Eigenwert bei gewohnlichen Differentialgileichungen zweiter
Ordnung, Ing. Arch. 8, 325-331 (1937).

COLLATZ, Genaherte Berechnung von Eigenwerten. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 19, 224-249, 297-318

L.
(1939).

COLLATZ, L. Naturliche Schriteweite bei numerischer Integration von Differentialgleichungssystemen,
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 22, 216~225 (1942).

COLLATZ, L. and ZURMUHL, R. Beitrage za_den Interpolationsverfahren der numerischen Integration von
Differentialgleichungen 1, und 2, Ordnung, Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 42-55 (1942).

COLLATZ, L. and ZURMUHL, R. Zur Genauigkeit verschiedener Integrationsverfahren bei gewohnlichen
Differentialgleichungen. Ing. Arch. 13, 34-36 (1942).

CORIOLIS, G. Mémoire sur le degré d'approximation... Jour, Math. Pures Appl. 2, 229-244 (1837).

COTTON, BE. Sur l'intégration approchée des équations différentielles. Bull. Soc. Math. France 36,
225-246 (1908).

COTTON, E. Sur l'intégration approchée des equations différentielles, Acta Math. 31, 107-126 (1908).

COTTON, E. Approximations successives et équations differentielles, Paris, Gauthier-Villars, én,
Sci, Math. fase. 28, 1928, 47 p.

DARWIN, G. H. Periodic orbits, Acta Math, 21, 99-242, espec. lig ff. (1897).

DEDERICK, ont ) The mathematics of exterior ballistics computations, Amer. Math. Month. 47, 628-
910)

DUFFING, G. Zur numerischen Integration gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen. Forschungsarbeiten
auf dem Gebiete des Ingenieurwesens 224, 29-50 (1920).

EULER, L. Fra calculi integralis, vol. 1, St. Petersbourg (Leningrad), 1768, 542 pe, pe

FALKNER, “i983 A method of numerical solution of differential equations. Phil, Mag. (7)21, 624-640
378

BIBLIOGRAPHY .
FANTA, W. Woer die angenaherte Auflosung von gewohnlichen Differentialgleichungen und Anwendung
auf Probleme der Mechanik, (Berlin Diss.). Vienna, Cari Gerold's Sohn, 1931, 40 p.

FEINSTEIN, L. and SCHWARZSCHILD, M. Automatic integration of linear second-order differential
equations by means of punched card machines. Rev. Sci. Instr. 12, 405—,08 (1941).

FORD, L. Re The numerical integration of differential equations (abstract). Bull. Amer, Math. Soc.
30, 215 (1924).

FORSYTH, A. Re Treatise on Differential Equations, London, Macmillan, 6th ed. 1929, p. 53-56.

FOWLER, R. H., GALLOP, E. G., LOCK, C. N. and RICHMOND, H. W. The aerodynamics of a spinning shell. ,
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. A221, 295-387 (1920).

FRAZER, R. A., JONES, W. P. and SKAN, S. W Note on approximations to functions and to solutions
of differential equations. Phil. Mag. (7) 25, 740-746 (1938).

FUBINI, G. An elementary observation of the equations of external ballistics. (Spanish). Math.
Notae 2, 3-10 (1942).

FUNK, P. Ueber Duffings Methede cur numerischen Integration von gewohnlichen Differentialgleichungen.
Ed
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 7, 410-411 (1927).

GAJAS, M. La comparaison des intégrales successives de M. Picard avec l'intégral cherchée, Bull.

GARCIA, G. Mouvement des projectiles autour de son centre de gravité. Sur le mouvement gyroscopique;
mouvement pendulaire des projectiles; dérivation, Revista Ci. Lima 42, 541-685 (1940).

GAU, E. Sur un théoréme de M. B. Picard. Bull. Soc. Math. France 43, 62-69 (1915).

GEBELEIN, H. Zur praktischen Losung gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen mittels schrittweiser
Annaherung. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 13, 385-386 (1933).

GOLAB, S. Un théor’me de la théorie des équations différentielles approchées, Mathematica (Cluj)
16, 61-65 (1910).

GOURSAT, £. Cours dtanalyse mathématique, vol, 2. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 5th ed. 1933, 685 p.,

GRAMMEL, Re Ein Beitrag zur Lésung des Dreikorperproblems. Astronomical Papers dedicated to Elis
Stromgren, Copenhagen, Einar Munksgaard, 1940, p. 40-50.

GROENEVELD, J. Numerieche Integration der Hauptgleichung der ausseren Ballistik. Zeit. Angew. Math.
Mech. 7, 150-151 (1927).

GRONWALL, T. H. Qualitative properties of the ballistic trajectory. Amn. of Math. (2)22, 44-65(1920).
HADAMARD, J. Cours d'analyse, vol. 2. Paris, Hermann, 1930,721 p., p. 297-313.
HARTREE, D. R. . Ballistic calculations, Nature 106, 152-154 (1921).

HARTREE, D. R. On an equation occurring in Falkner and Skan's approximate treatment of the equations
of the boundary layer. Proc. Camb. Phil, Soc, 33, 223-239 (1937).

HERMANN, E. E. Exterior Ballistics, 1935. Annapolis, U.S. Naval Inst., reprint 1940, viii+ 305 p.
' HILL, G. We Researches in the lunar theory. Amer, Jour. Math, 1, 5-26, 129-147, 245-260 (1878).

HIRSCHFELD, H. O. A generalization of Picard's method of successive approximation. Proc. Camb. Phil.
Soc. 32, 86-95 (1936).

HORNSTEIN, M. ,  Einige Bemerkungen ber lineare Differenzengleichungen zweiter Ordnung und dber

moa. . . —— arias facie mw Pay
Kettenbruche, Rece Kath. (Mat. Sbornik) N.S. 5 (47), 269-288 (1939).
379

BIBLIOGRAPHY

HORT, W. Die Differentialgleichungen des Ingenieurs. Berlin, Springer, 2nd ed. 1925, xii+ 700 p.,
P. 216-325.

IGLISCH, 8. Zur praktischen Behandlung von Randwertaufgaben gewohnlicher linearer Differential-
gleichungen mit nicht konstanten Koeffizienten. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 14, 51-58 (1934).

INCE, E. L. Ordinary Differential Equations. London, Longmans, 1927, p. 540-547.
INFELD, L. Ona new treatment of some eigenvalue problems, Phys. Rev. (2) 59, 737-747 (1941).

JACKSON, D. The method of numerical integration in exterior ballistics, War Department document
No. 984. Washington, D. C., Govt. Printing Office, 1921, 43 p.

KANTOROVITCH, 7 ( ye method of successive approximations for functional equations, Acta Math. 71,
63-97 (1939). ;

KELLER, E.G. Beat theory of non-linear circuits. Jour. Franklin Inst, 228, 319-337 (1939).
KLOSE, A. Zur Integration der ballistischen Gleichung. Deutsche Math. 2, 473-479 (1937).
KNOBLOCH, H. Zur Interpolation von Kurvenscharen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 22, 364-366 (1942).

KORMES, M, A note on the integration of linear second-order differential equations by means of punch-

KORN, A. Boer eine Methode der sukzessiven Naherungen zur Losung linearer gewohnlicher und partieller
Differentialgleichungen. Sitzber. Berl, Math. Ges. 15, 115-119 (1916).

KRAWICHOUK, M. Sur la méthode de N. Kryloff pour 1'intégration approchée des équations de la physique
mathématique. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 183, 47he476 (1926).

KRAWTCHOUK, M. On a method of N. Kryloff for the integration of ordinary differential equations.
. (Ukrainian), Mém, Acad. Sci. Kiev (2) 5, 12-33 (1927).

KRAWICHOUK, M. Sur ltintégration approchée des équations differentielles linéaires. Atti Congr.
Intern. Bologna 1928, vol. 3, Bologna, Zanichelli, 1930, p. 109-115.

KRAWTCHOUK, M. Sur les derivées des intégrales approchées de certaines équations différentielles.
Rend. Circ, Mat. Palermo 54, 194-198 (1930).

KRYLOFF, N. = Les méthodes de solution approchée des problémes de Ja physique mathématique. Mém.Sci.
Math., fase. 49. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1931, 70 p.

KRYLOFF, N. Sur la solution approchée des problémes de la physique mathématique et de la science
d'ingénieur. Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS Leningrad (Izvestia Akad, Nauk SSSR) (7) 1930, 1089-111,
(1930). Reprint Revista Mat. Hisp. Amer. (2) 6, 213-238 (1931).

KRYLOFF, N. and BOGOLIUBOFF, N. Upon some new results in the domain of non-linear mechanics.
Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. A 3, 523=526 (1936).

KRYLOFF, N. and BOGOLIUBOFF, N. Introduction to Non-Linear Mechanics. (Tr. Lefschetz, S.). Annals of
Mathemtics Studies, No. 11. Princeton, N. J., Princeton Univ. Press, 1943.

KUITA, W. Beitrag zur naherungsweisen Integration totaler Differentialgleichungen. Zeit. Math. Phys.
46, 435-453 (1901).

LAGRANGE, J. L. Essai sur le probléme des trois corps. Oeuvres de Lagrange, vol. 6. Paris, Gauthier-

LAHAYE, E. Une méthode nouvelle dtintégration de certains groupes d'équations différentielles.
C. Re Acad. Sci. Paris 185, 172-173 (1927).

LAHAYE, E. Les itérations intégrales convergentes. Application aux équations différentielles.
du premier ordre algébriques en y et dy/dx, Acad. Roy. Belgique, Cl. Sci. Mém. Coll. 18,
380

BIBLIOGRAPHY

LAHAYE, E. Les itérations intégrales convergentes et leur application aux équations différentielles
du premier ordre, algébriques en y et y'. C, R. Acad. Sci. Paris 210, 621-624 (1940).

LAHAYE, E. Sur la résolution des équations dz/dx « r(x,z)(r rationnel en z) par des iterations inté=
grales et differentielles convergentes. Jour, Math. Pures Appl. (9) 22, 1-23 (1943).

LANCZOS, C. A new approximtion method in solving linear differential equations with non-oscillating
coefficients, (Abstract). Bull. Amer. Nath. Soc. 41, 183-184 (1935).

LANCZOS, C. A new approximation method in solving linear differential equations with rational
coefficients. (Abstract). Bull. Amer, Math. Soc. 42, 30 (1936).

LAURITZEN, S.  _ Nogle Bemaerkninger om Diffrentialligningen dy/dx = f(x,y). Mat. Tidsskr. B, Kgben-
havn 1937, 104-108 (1937),

LEGENDRE, A. M. Dissertation sur la question de balistique proposée par l'Académie Royale des
Sciences et Belles-Lettres de Prusse pour le prix de 1762. Berlin, G. J. Decker,1782, 68p.

LEVY, H. The numerical solution of a certain class of differential equations. Proc. Lond. Math.
Soc. (2) 24, 459-470 (1926).

LEFT, He A numerical study of differential equations, Jour. Lond. Hath. Sec. 7, 305-318 {1932}.
LEVY, H. and BAGGOTT, E. A. Numerical Studies in Differential Equations, vol. 1. London, Watts,
1934, vidi + 238 p.

LIAPOUNOFF, A. MH. Sur une série dans la théorie des équations différentielles linéaires de second
ordre & coefficients périodiques. Mém. Acad, St. Pétersbourg (8) 13, No. 2, 70 p. (1902).

LINDELOF, E. Sur l'application des méthodes d'approximations successives & l'étude des inté-
grales réelles des equations différentielles, Jour.Math. Pures Appl.(4) 10, 117-128 (1894).

LINDELOF, E. Remarques sur itintégration numérique des équations différentielles ordinaires., Acta
Soc. Sci, Fennicae A(2) 2, No. 13, 21 p. (1938).

THNeTENT a —_ eladebencee Je
LINTSTED AY Beitrag Zur Integration der Diffsrentialgiseich ay dsr

rl A

St. Petersbourg (7) 31, No. 4, 20 p. (1883).
LIOUVILLE, J. Sur le deveioppement des fonctions ou parties de fonctions en series dont les di-
vers termes sont assujettis a satisfaire a une meme equation differentielle du second ordre
contenant une parametre variable. Jour. Math. Pures Appl. 2, 16-22 (1837).

LIOUVILIE, J. Sur la théorie des equations différentiellea lineaires et sur les développements des

fonctions en séries. Jour. Math. Pures Appl. 3, 562-614 (18638).
LIPSCHITZ, R. Sur la possibilité d'intégrer complétement un systeme donné d'équations différent~
jellies, Bull. Sci, Math. 10, 149-159 (18765.

LIPSCHITZ, R. Lehrbuch der Analysis, vol. 2. Bonn, Cohen, 1880, xiv + 734 p., Pe 500-512,

MADELUNG, E. Uber eine Methode zur schnellen numerischen Losung von Differentialgleichungen
aweiter Ordnung, Zeit. Phys. 67, 516-518 (1931).

MADER, K. Mathematische Hilfemittel in der Physik. (Vol. III of Handbuch der Physik). Berlin,
Springer, 1928, chap. 15, p. 631-4635.

MARCHANT METHODS, Starting values for Milne-method integration of ordinary differential equations
of first order, or of second order when first derivatives are absent, The method of
Taylor's series. MU-261, Oct. 1943, 4 p. Marchant Calc. Mach. Co., Oakland, Calif.

MARCHANT METHODS. Starting value for Milne-method integration of ordinary differential equations
of the first order. The method of Milne. Mi-260, Jan., 1944, 11 p.
381

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MARCHANT METHODS. Milne method of step-by-step double integration of second order differential
equations in which first derivatives are absent. MM-216A, Jan., 1943, 6 p.

MARCHANT METHODS. Milne method of step-by~step integration of ordinary differential equations when
starting values are known. MM~216, June, 1942, 10 p.

MASSERA, J. F. Formulae for finite differences with applications to the approximte integration of
differential equations of the first order, (Spanish). Publ. Inst. Mat. Univ. Nac. Litoral

4, 99-166 (1943).

McEWEN, W. H. Problems of closest approximation connected with the solution of linear differential
equations, Trans, Amer, Math. Soc. 33, 979-997 (1931).

McEWEN, W. H. On the approximate solution of linear differential equations with boundary conditions,
Bull, Amer, Math. Soc, 38, 887-894 (1932).

MIKELADZE, S. Uber die Integration von Differentialgleichungen mit Hilfe der Differenzenmethode.
(Russian, German summary.). Bull. Acad. Sei. URSS Sér, Math. (Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR)
1939, 627-642 (1939).

MIKELADZE, S. Veraligemeinerung der Methode der numerischen Integration von Differentialgleichungen
mit Hilfe der Formeln der mechanischen Quadratur. (Russian, German summary.). Trav. Inst.
Math. Thilissi (Trudy Tbiliss, Mat. Inst.) 7, 47-63 (1940).

MIKELADZE, S. On the approximate integration of linear differential equations with discontinuous
coefficients. (Russian.). Bull. Acad. Sci. Georgian SSR 3, 633-639 (1942).

MIKELADZE, S. New formulas for the numerical integration of differential equations, (Russian.).
Bull. Acad, Sci. Georgian SSR 4, 215-218 (1943).

MILNE, W. E. Numerical integration of ordinary differential equations, Amer. Math. Month. 33,
455-460 (1926).

MILNE, W. ra ) On the numerical solution of a boundary value problem, Amer, Math. Month. 38, 14-17
1931).

MILNE, W. E. On the numerical integration of certain differential equations of the second order.

Amer. Math. Month. 40, 322-327 (1933).
MILNE, W. E, The numerical integration of y'' + g(x)y = f(x). Amer, Math. Month. 49, 96-98 (1942).

MIRANDA, C. Teoremi e metodi per l'integrazione numerica della equazione differenziale di Fermi
Memorie Reale Accad. d'Italia 5, 285-322 (1934). ;

VON MISES, R. Zur numerischen Integration von Differentialgleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech.
10, 81-92 (1930).

MOIGNO, F. N. M. Legons de caleul différentiel et de calcul intégral, vol. 2. Paris,Bachelier, 1844,
xiviil + 783 Pes Pe 385-434, 513-534.

DE MONTESSUS, R. and D'ADHEMAR, R. Calcul numérique. Paris, Doin, 1911, 249 Pep De 139-237.

MOULTON, F. R. Periodic Orbits. Washington, D. C., Carnegie Institution, 1920, xiii + 524 p.

MOULTON, F. R. Numerical solution of differential equations. Chap. X of Smithsonian mathemtical
formulae and tables of elliptic functions, (Edited Adams, E, P. and Hippisley, R. L.).
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 74, No. 1, 220-242 (1922).

MOULTON, F. R. Differential Equations, New York, Macmillan, 1930, p. 179-231.

MOULTON, F. R. New Methods in Exterior Ballistics. Chicago, Univ. Chicago Press, 1926,

MULLER, K. Ueber die Eindeutigkeit der Integrale eines Systems gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen

und die Konvergenz einer Gattung von Verfahren zur Approximation dieser Integrale. Sitzber.
Heidelberg, 1927 (9 Abh.), 38 p.
382

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MULLER, M. Sber das Fundamentaltheorem in der Theorie der gewohnlichen Differentialgleichungen.
Math. Zeit. 26, 619-645 (1927). :

MULLER, HK. Uber den Konvergenzbereich des Verfahrens der schrittweisen Naherungen bei gewohnlicher
Differentialgleichungen. Math, Zeit. 41, 163-175 (1936).

MULLER, M. tber die Existenz periodischer Losungen bei gewissen Systemen gewohnlicher Differen-
tialgeleichungen erster Ordnung. Math. Zeit. 48, 128-135 (1942).

NAGUMO, M. Uber das Verfahren der sukzessiven Approximationen zur Integration gewohnlicher Differ-
entialgleichung und die Eindeutigkeit ihrer Integrale. Jap. Jour. Math.7, 143-160 (1930).

NAGUMO, M. ther das Verhalten der Integrale vonAy'' + f(x,y,y', A) = 0 fur 0. Proc. Phys.-
Math, Soc. Japan 21, 529-534 (1939).

NASTA, M. Contributo al calcolo delle velocita critiche degli alberi motori, Rend. Accad, dei Lincei
Roma (6) 12, 209-216 (1930).

NIEMYTZKI, V.  Intégration qualitative approximative du systéme d'équations dx/dt = Q(x,y), dy/dt =
P(x,y)» C. Re (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N. S.) 38, 62-65 (1943).

a tt terttenha Tastaahens .
NOETHER, F. Uber analytische Berechnung der Geschosspendelungen. Gott. Nachr. 1919, 373-391.

NOWAKOWSKI, A. Zur numerischen Integration gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen mit der Rechenma~
schine. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 13, 299-322 (1933).

NUMEROV, Be ; ) Note on the numerical integration of d°x/at* = f(x,t). Astr. Nachr, 230, 359-364
1927).

NYSTROM, gE. J. (her die numerische Integration von Differentialgleichungen. Acta Soc. Sci. Fennicae
50, No. 13, 56 p. (1925).

OKAMURA, H. Sur ltapproximation successive et Lliunicité de la solution de dy/dx = f(x,y). Memoirs
Coll. Sci. Kyoto Imperial Univ. 14, 85-96 (1931).

™a x ~ 2 rae .
FAINLEVE, P. Sur le calcul des intégrales d'un systame différentiel par la méthode de Canchy-Lip-

schitz. Bull. Soc. Math. France 27, 149-152 (1899).

PAINLEVE, P, Gewohnliche Differentialgleichungen; Existenz der Ldsungen. Ency. Math. Wiss., vol.
II 1, 1; article II A 4a. Leipzig, Teubner, 1900, p. 189=229.

PEANO, G. ( jutseration par séries des équations différentielles linéaires, Math. Ann. 32, 450-456
1888).

PERES, Je Sur la méthode des fonctions majorantes et la méthode des approximations successives.
Bull. Sei. Math. (2) 39, 179-181 (1915).

PETROVITCH, M. Intégration qualitative des équations différentielies. Mém, Sci. lath. fasc.i8.
Paris. Gauthier-Villars, 1931, 58 p.

PIAGGIO, H. T. H. An Elementary Treatise on Differential Equations and Their Applications. London,
Bell, 2nd ed. 1928, p. W-108, 224-228,

PIAGGIO, H. Aree ) On the numerical integration of differential equations, Phil. Mag. (6) 37, 596-
600 (1919).

PICARD, &  Memoire sur la théorie des equations aux dérivées partielles et la méthode des approxi-
mations successives, Jour, Math. Pures Appl. (4) 6, 145-210, 231 (1890).

PICARD, Ee Sur l’application des méthodes d'approximtions successives @ l'étude de certaines
equations différentielles ordinaires. Jour. Math. Pures Appl. (4) 9, 217-271 (1893).

PICARD, E. Traité d'analyse, Paris, Gauthier-Villars: vol. 2, 3rd ed. 1926, pe 368-394; vol.3, 3rd
ed. 1928, p. 88-99.
383

BIBLIOGRAPHY

PICONE, M. Sul metodo delle minime potenze ponderate e sul metodo di Ritz per il calcolo approssimato
nei problemi della fisica-matemtica, Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 52, 225-253 (1928).

PICONE, M. Maggiorazione dell'errore d'approssimazione nel metodo dtintegrazione Cauchy-Lipschitz
dei sistemi di equazioni differenziali ordinarie. Rend. Accad. Lincei Roma (6) 15, 859-864
(1932).

POINCARE, H. Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, vol. 1. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1892,
385 pe

POMEY, L. Sur le théoreme d'existence, etc. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 180, 569-571, 725-727, 1093-1096,
2006-2008 (1925).

POPOFF, K. Ueber eine Eigenschaft der ballistischen Kurve und ihre Anwendung auf die Integration
der Bewegungsgleichungen, Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 1, 96-106 (1921).

POPOFF, K. Les méthodes d'integration de Poincare et le probleme générale de la balistique ex-
terleure. Paris, Gauthier-Villars, 1925, 76 p.

PORTER, M. B. On the roots of functions connected by a linear recurrent relation of the second
order. Ann. of Math. (2) 3, 55=70 (1902).

PUGACHEV, ¥. S. Notes on exterior ballistics of projectiles and bombs. (Russian. English summary.) .
Appl. Math. Mech. (Akad. Nauk SSSR. Prikl. Mat. Mech.) 6, 347~368 (1942).

PUGACHEV, V. S. Approximate method of solving the non-linear problem of a rotating projectile,
Guseian. English summary.). Appl. Math. Mech. (Akad. Nauk SSSR, Prikl. Mat. Mech.) 7, 313-
32h (1943). :

RANKIN, A. W. On the average-slope method of solving differential equations, Amer, Math. Month. A5,
461-462 (1938).

RATZERDORFER, J. Determination of the buckling load of struts with successive approximation. Jour.
Roy. Aeronaut. Soc. 47, 103-105 (1943).

REMES, E. Some approximate formlae for the numerical integration of differential equations. Phil.
Mag. (7) 5, 392-400 (1928).

RICHARDSON, L. F. How to solve differential equations approximately by arithmetic, Math. Gaz. 12,
415-421 (1925).

RIEBESELL,P. Uber die Integration der ballistischen Hauptgleichung bei Andwendung des Sommerfeldschen
Luftwiderstandsgesetzes, Arch. Math. Phys. (3) 25, 103~108 (1926).

ROOT, R. E. The Mathematics of Engineering. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1927, p. 514-528,

RUNGE, C. Ueber die numerische Auflosung von Differentialgleichungen. Math. Ann. 46, 167-178 (1895).

RUNGE, C, and WILLERS, F. A. Numerische und graphische Quadratur und Integration gewohnlicher und
partieller Differentialgleichungen. Ency. Math. Wiss., vol. II 3, 1; article IT C2,Leipzig,
Teubner, 1915, p. 47-176.

VON SANDEN, H. Zur Berechnung des kleinsten Eigenwerts von y+ p(x)y - 0. Zeit. Angew. Math.
Mech, 21, 381-382 (1941).

SAUER, R. Uber Interpolation von Kurvenscharen mit Anwendung auf die Berechnung von Geschossflug~
bahnen, Zeit, Angew. Math. Mech. 20, 280-284 (1940).

SAUER, R. and Poscu, Hq Anwendungen des Adamsschen Integrationsverfahrens in der Ballistik. Ing.
Arch. 12, 158168 (1941).

SCARBOROUGH, J. B, Numerical Mathematical Analysis. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1930, p. 218-283,

SCHEFFE, HK. Linear differential equations with two-term recurrence formilas. Jour, Math. Phys. (M.
IT.) 21, 240-249 (1942).
384

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SCHELKUNOFF, S. A. Solution of linear and slightly nonlinear differential equations. Quart. Appl.
Math. 3, 348-355 (1946).

SCHULZ, G. Interpolationsverfahren zur numerischen Integration gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen.
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 12, 44-59 (1932).

SCHULZ, G. Fehlerabschatzung fur das Stormersche Integrationsverfahren. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. A,
22h—234 (1934) »

SEVERINI, C. Sull'integrazione approssimata delle equazioni differenziali ordinarie. Bologna, Zan-
ichelli, 1899, 27 p.

SHOHAT, J. A new analytical method for solving van der Pol's and certain related types of non~linear
_ differential equations, homogeneous and non-homogeneous, Jour.Appl. Phys. 14, bO-48 (1943).

SHOHAT, J 7 On van der Pol's and non-linear differential equations, Jour. Appl. Phys. 15, 568-574
1

SOUTHWELL, R. a " the natural frequencies of vibrating systems. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 174A, 433-
457 (1940).

STANGE, K. Jur Berechnung einer Flugbahnschar nach dem Athenschen Verfahren, Zeit. Angew. Math.
Mech. 20, 350-357 (1940).

STEFFENSEN, J. F. On the degree of rigour required in numerical integrations, 5 Kongr.Skand. Math.
in Helsingfors, p. 125-130, 1922.

STEKLOFF, W. Sur les problémes de représentations des fonctions A l'aide de polynomes, du calcul
approché des intégrales définies, du développement des fonctions en séries infinies suivant
les polynomes et de l'interpolation, considerées au point de vue des idées de Tchébycheff.
Proc. Intern. Math. Congr. Toronto, 1924, vol. 1, 1928, p. 631-640.

STOHLER, K. Eine Vereinfachung bei der numerischen Integration gewohnlicher Differentiaigleichungen.
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 23, 120-122 (1943).

sTORMER, C. Sur les trajectoires des corpuscules electrisés dans l'espace sous itaction du magnét—
isme terrestre avec application aux aurores boréales. Arch. Sci. Phys. Nat. Geneve (4) 24,
5-18, 123-158, 221-247 (1907).

STORMER, C. Resultats des calculs numériques des trajectoires des corpuscules électriques dans le
champ d'un aimant élémentaire. Videnskapsselskapets Skrifter, Kristiania 1913: 1, Now, 7h
Pes 2, No. 10, 58 poz 2, Now U4, 64 p. (1923).

STORMER, c. Méthode dtintégration numérique des équations différentielles ordinaires. C. R. Congr.
Intern. Math. Strasbourg 1920. Toulouse, Privat, 1921, p. 243-257.

STRUTT, Ms J. 0. Der charakteristische Exponent der Hillschen Differentialgleichung, Math. Ann.

ani era_eta [10290
AV PAIK IMT {1929},

en ee ee en ae rae ene + aes eT 2 a a . +
SUBBOTIN, Mo F. Numerical integration of aitfer ential equations. (Russian. Prench sumary,}, Bull

Univ. Tashkent 16, 273-286 (1927).
TA LI. ter die allgemeine lineare Differentialgleichung. Comment. Math. Helv, 12, 1-19 (19391940).

TAMARKINE, J. D. Sur la méthode de C. Stormer pour ltintégration approchée des équations différent-
jelles ordinaires. Math. Zeit. 16, 214-219 (1923).

TAMBS LYCHE, R. Solution explicite de ltéquation différentielle générale du premier ordre, Avhandl.
25-Arajubileet Tekniske Hfiskole Trondheim, 1935, p. 765-766. Reprint Det Kgl.Norske Viden-
skabers Selskabs Skrifter, Trondheim 1935, (2), No. 35, 24 p. (1935).

TOLLMIEN, W. Uoer die Fehlerabschatzung beim Adamsschen Verfahren zur Integration gewohnlicher
Differentialgleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 18, 83-90 (1938).

TSCHAPPAT, W. H. Ballistics. Encyclopaedia Britannica, New Volumes 30, 386-394, (1922).
385

BIBLIOGRAPHY

TURTON, F. J. res ial in the mmerical solution of differential equations. Phil. Mag. (7) 28, 359-
363 (1939). ;

TURTON, F. J. ‘Two notes on the numerical solution of differential equations, Phil. Mag. (7) 28,
381-384 (1939).

VAHLEN, T. Beitrage zur Ballistik, Arch. Math. Phys. (3): 25, 209-231 (1916); 26, 119-125 (1917).

VIETORIS ; L. Boer die Integration gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen durch Iteration. Monatsh.
Math. Phys.:39, 15-50 (1932); 41, 384-391 (1934).

WAR DEPARTMENT, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. A Course in Exterior Ballistics. War Dept. document No.
1051. Washington, D. C., Govt. Printing Office, 1921, 127 P.

WEBSTER, Me G. ) On the Springfield rifle and the Leduc forma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 6, 289
1920).

WEINEL, E. Eine Erweiterung des Grammelschen Verfahrens zur Berechnung von Eigenwerten und Eigen~
funktionen. Ing. Arch. 10, 283-291 (1939).

WEYL, H. Concerning the differential equations of some boundary-layer problems. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
U.S.Aet 27, 578-583 (1941); 28, 100-102 (1942).

WEYL, H. On the differential equations of the simplest boundary-layer problems, Ann. of Math. (2) 43,
381-407 (1942).

WHITEHEAD, A. Graphical solution for high-angle fire. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A94, 301-307 (1917-
91

WIENER, O. pie a0 Berechnung der Geschossflugbahnen, Abh, Ges. Wiss. Leipzig 36, No. 1, 66
pes (1918).

WILLERS, F. A. Methoden der praktischen Analysis. Berlin, de Gruyter, 1928, 344 p., De 305-334.

ZAREMBA, S. K. Remarques sur 1'intégration approchée des equations différentielles, Bull. Intern.
Acad, Polon, Sci. Lett., Cl. Sci. Math. Nat. A 1936, 528-535 (1937).

ZECH, Te Anschauliches zur Picarditeration der Differentialgleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech.
17, 341-352 (1937).

ZECH, T. Zum Abklingen nichtlinearer Schwingungen, Ing, Arch, 13, 21-33 (1942).

ZURMUHL., R. Zur numerischen Integration gewohnlicher Differentialgleichungen aweiter und héherer
Ordnung. Untersuchungen zu den Verfahren von Blaess und Runge-Kutta-Nystrom, Zeit. Angew.
Math. Mech. 20, 104-116 (1940). ;

22, PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

ALLEN, D. N., SOUTHWELL, R. V. and VAISEY, G. Relaxation methods applied to engineering problems.
XI, Problems governed by the "quasi-plane-potential equation". Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 183A,
258-283 (1945).

ARTEMIEFF, N. Die Anwendung des Storungsverfahrens zur Berechnmung der Eigenwerte bei Deformation des
Randes. Ree, Math. Moscou (Mat. Sbornik) 39, No. 3, 52-66 (1932).

BATEMAN, OM eriers Differential Equations. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1932,xii1 + 522 p., p.

BENNETT, A. A., MILNE, W. E. and BATEMAN, H. Numerical integration of differential equations. Report
of committee on mmerical integration. Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No. 92. Washington, D. C.,
Nat. Acad. Sci., 1933, chap. 4.
386

BIBLIOGRAPHY

BERGMANN, S. Uber die Entwicklung der harmonischen Funktionen der Ebene und des Raumes nach Orthog~
onalfunktionen, Math, Ann. 86, 238-271 (1922).

BERGMANN, S. Hin Naherungeverfahren zur Losung gewisser partieller, linearer Differentialgleichungen.
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 11, 323-330 (1931).

BERGMANN, S. Zur Theorie der Funktionen, die eine lineare partielle Differentialgleichung befriedigen
I. C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sei. URSS. (N.S.) 15, 227-230 (1937).

BERGMAN, S. The approximation of functions satisfying a linear partial differential equation. Duke
Math, Jour. 6, 537-561 (1940).

BICKLEY, W. G. Experiments in approximating to solutions of a partial differential equation. Phil.
Mag. (7) 32, 50-66 (1941).

BIEZENO, C. B. and GRAMMEL, R. Technische Dynamik, Berlin, Springer, 1939 (Reprint, Ann Arbor, Ed-
wards, 1944) p. 135-180.

BINDER, L. Uber Warmeubergang auf ruhige oder bewegte Lufte sowie Liftung und Kuhlung elektrischer
Maschinen. Halle, Knapp, 1911, v +112 p., p. 20-26.

BIRKHOFF, G. E. Circular plates of variable thickness. Phil Mag. (6) 43, 953-962 (1922).

BLAISDELL, B. E. The physical properties of fluid interfaces of large radius of curvature. Jour.
Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 19, 186=245 (1940).

BOUKIDIS, N. A. and RUGGIERO, R. J. An iterative method for determining dynamic deflections and
frequencies, Jour. Aeronaut. Sci. 11, 319-328 (1944).

BOUSSINESQ, J. Sur le calcul de plus en plus approche des vitesses bien contimes de régime
uniforme par des polynomes, dans un tube prismatique & section carrée. C. R. Acad. Sci,
Paris 158, 1743-749 (19143.

BREMEKAMP, H. Quelques applications de la méthode des approximations successives, Proc, Akad, Wet.
Amsterdam 41, 291-300 (1938).
BRILLOUIN, M. La méthode des moindres carrdés et les Squations aux dérivées partielies de la physique

mathématique. Ann. de Phys. 6, 137-233 (1916).

BROUWER, F. Wellenmechanische Eigemrertprobleme und Integration durch Reihen. Ann. der Phys. 8h,
915-929 (1927).

CARMICHAEL, R. D. Boundary value and expansion problems, Amer, Jour. Math.e: 43, 69-101, 232-270
(1921); 44, 129-152 (1922).

CHRISTOPHERSON, D. G. A new mathematical method for the solution of film lubrication problems. Jour.
Proc. Inst. Mech. Engrs. 146, 126-135 (1942).

CHRISTOPHERSON, D. G. and SOUTHWELL, R. V. Relaxation methods applied to engineering problems.III.
Problems involving two independent variables. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 168A, 317-350 (1938).

COLLATZ, L. Bemerkungen zur Fehlerabschatzung fir das Differenzenverfahren bei partiellen Different~
ialgleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 13, 56-57 (1933).

COLLATZ, L. Das Differenzenverfahren mit hoherer Approximation flr lineare Differentialgleichungen.
Schr. Math. Sem. Inst. Angew. Math. Univ. Berlin 3, 1-34 (1935).

COLLATZ, L. Uber das Differenzenverfahren bei Anfangswertproblemen partieller Differential-
gleichungen. Zeit. Angew, Math. Mech. 16, 239-247 (1936).

COURANT, R. Uber die Methode des Dirichletschen Prinzipes. Math. Ann. 72, 517-550 (1912).

COURANT, R. Uber die Eigenwerte bei den Differentialgleichungen der mathematischen Physik. Math.
Zeit. 7, 1-57 (1920).
387
BIBLIOGRAPHY

COURANT, Re oer ein konvergenzerzeugendes Prinzip in der Variationsrechnung. Gott. Nachr. 1922,
Us4-150.

COURANT, R. Uber die Theorie der linearen partiellen Differenzengleichungen, Gott.Nachr. 1925, 98-109.

COURANT, R. Bemerkungen zur Frage der numerischen Auflosung von Randwertproblemen, die aus der Vari-
ationsrechnung entspringen. Gott. Nachr. 1925, 122-127.

COURANT, Re Uber Randwertaufgaben bei partiellen Differenzengleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech.
6, 322-325 (1926).

COURANT, Re beer direkte Methoden der Variationsrechnung und uber verwandte Fragen. Math. Ann. 97,
711-736 (1927).

COURANT, R. Advanced Methods in Applied Mathematics. New York, New York Univ. Lectures, 1941,
(mimeo), p. 66-76.

COURANT, R., FRIEDRICHS, K. and LEWY, H. ther die partiellen Differenzengleichungen der mathemati-
schen Physik, Math. Ann. 100, 32~74 (1928).

DANIELL, P. J. Orthogonal potentials. Phil. Mag. (7) 2, 247=258 (1926).

DRACH, J. Sur les valeurs moyennes partielles et leur application aux problémes de physique mathé-
matique. C. R. Acad. Sci, Paris 192, 1327-1331 (1931). .

DUNCAN, W. J. Galerkin's method in mechanics and differential equations. Gt. Brit.Aeronaut. Research
Comm. Reports and Mem, No. 1798, 33 p. (1937).

DUNCAN, W. J. Principles of Galerkin's method. Gt. Brit. Aeronaut, Research Comm, Reports and Mem,
No. 1648, 24 p. (1938).

DUS INBERRE, a. Numerical methods for transient heat-flow, Trans. Amer. Soc. Mech.Engrs. 67, 703-
709 (1945).

EMMONS, H. We ( ay numerical solution of partial differential equations. Quart, Appl. Math. 2, 173-
195 (1944).

EMMONS, H. W. The numerical solution of heat-conduction problems. Trans, Amer. Soc. Mech. Engrs. 65,
607-615 (1943).

FOWLER, C. M. Analysis of numerical solutions of transient heat-flow problems. Quart. Appl. Math, 3,
361-376 (1946).

FOX, L. Solution by relaxation methods of plane potential problems with mixed boundary conditions.
Quart. Appl. Math. 2, 251-257 (1944).

FRANK, P, and VON MISES, R. Die Differential—- und Integralgleichungen der Mechanik und Physik, vol.
1. Braunschweig, Vieweg, 2nd ed. 1930, xxiii + 916 p., p. 734-737.

FRAZER, R. Aw, JONES, W. P, and SKAN, S. W. Approximations to functions and to the solutions of dif-
as equations. Gt. Brit. Aeronaut. Research Comm. Reports and Mem. No. 1799, 33 p.
1937).

FRIEDRICHS, K. O. and STOKER, J. J. Buckling of the circular plate beyond the critical thrust. Jour,
Appl. Mech. 9, A7-Al4 (1942).

FROCHT, M. M. and LEVEN, M. M. A rational approach to the numerical solution of Laplace's equation.
Jour. Appl. Phys. 12, 596-604 (1941).

GANDY, R. W. G. and SOUTHWELL, R. V. Relaxation methods applied to engineering problems. V. Con-
. (i910) transformation of a region in plane space. Phil, Trans.Roy. Soc. Lond. 238A, 453-475
1940).

GERMAY, R. H. Intégration, par approximations successives, les squations aux dérivées partielles,
C. R. Acad. Sei, Paris 178, 685-68 (1924).
388

BIBLIOGRAPHY

GERMAY, R. H. Sur l'integration par approximations successives des systémes d'équations aux dérivées
partielles du premier ordre de forme résolue. C. R. Acad. Sci, Paris 179, 1580-1583 (1924).

GERSCHGORIN, 5S. Fehlerabschatzung fur das Differenzenverfahren zur Losung partieller Differential-
gleichungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 10, 373-382 (1930).

GOLDMANN, E. Anwendung der Ritzschen Methode auf die Theorie der Transversalschwingungen frei
achwingender Platten von rechteckiger, rhombischer, dreieckiger und elliptischer Begrenzung,
(Inaug. -Diss. Breslau.). Breslau, Fleischmann, 1918, 67 p.

COL SBORO 3) R. The tides in oceans on a rotating globe. Proc, Roy..Soc. Lond. 117A, 692-718

1928).

GOLDSBOROUGH, G. R. Note on the method of Ritz for the solution of problems in elasticity. Phil.
Mag. (7) 7, 332-337 (1929).

GRAMMEL, R. Ein neues Verfahren zur Losung technischer Eigenwertprobleme. Ing. Arch..10, 35-46
(1939).

HADAMARD, J. Mémoire sur le probleme dtanalyse relatif 4 1'équilibre des plaques élastiques in-

castrées. Paris, Mém. Sav. Etrang. (2) 33, No. 14, 128 p. (1908).

HAUSEN, H. Naherungsverfahren zur Berechnung des Warmeaustausches in Regeneratoren. Zeit. Angew.
Math. Mech. 11, 105-114 (1931).

HENCKY, H. Die Berechnung dunner rechteckiger Platten mit verschwindender Biegungsteifigkeit. Zeit.
Angew. Math. Mech. 1, 81-89, 423-424 (1921).

HENCKY, H. Die nomerische Bearbeitung von partielien Differentialgleichungen in der Technik. Zeit.
Angew. Math, Mech, 2, 58-66 (1922).

HENCKY, H. Eine wichtige Vereinfachung der Methode von Ritz zur angenaherten Behandlung von Vari-
ationsproblemen, Zeit. Angew, Math. Mech. 7, 8081 (1927).

HILBERT, D. Sher das Dirichletsche Prinzip. Math. Ann. 59, 161-186 (1904); Jour. Reine Angew. Math.

a4 z fy \
129, §3-67 (1905).

HRENNIKOFF, A. Solution of problems of elasticity by the framework method. Jour. Appl. Mech. 8,
A169-A175 (1941).

JAMES, H. M. Some applications of the Rayleigh-Ritz method to the theory of the structure of matter.
Bull, Amer. Math. Soc. 47, 869-884 (1941).

JEFFCOTT, ra 3) On the vibration of beams under the action of moving loads. Phil. Mag. (7) 8, &+97
~ (1929).

KANTOROVIC, L. Sur une méthode de résolution ayprochée d'équations différentielles aux dérivées
partielles, (Russian and French.). C. R. (Doklady) Acad, Sci. URSS (N.5S.) 2, 532-536( 1934).

KAISER, R. Rechnerische und experimentelle Ermittlung der Durchbie m und Spannungen von quad~
ratischen Platten bei freien Auflagerung an den Randern, gleichmassig verteilter Last und
grossen Ausblegungen. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 16, 73-98 (1936).

VON elma T. The engineer grapples with non-linear problems. Bull, Amer. Math. Soc. 46, 615-683

KARAS, K. ( rs) Eigenschwingungen inhomogener Saiten. Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Wien 145 (IIa), 797-816
1936).

KELLNER, G. W. Die Ionisierungsspannung des Heliums nach der Schrédingerschen Theorie, Zeit. Phys.
hh, 91-109 (1927).

KIESSLING, F. Eine Methode aur approximativen Berechnung einseitig eingespannter Druckstabe mit ve~
randerlichen Querschnitt. Zeit. Angew. Math. Wech. 10, 594-599 (1930).
389

BIBLIOGRAPHY

KIMBALL, G. E. and SHORTLEY, G. H. The numerical solution of Schrodinger's equation. Phys. Rev. (2)
45, 815-820 (19345.

KNOTT, C. G. Comparison of Mr, Crawford's measurements of the deflection of a clamped square plate
with Ritz's solution, Proc, Roy. Soc. Edin. 32, 390-392 (1912).

u

KOCH, J. J. Bestimmung hoherer ritischer Drehzahlen schnell laufender Wellen.Proc.Intern.Congr.
Appl, Mech. Zurich, 1926, Zurich, Fiss1i,1927, pe 213-218,

KORMES, M. Numerical solution of the boundary value problem for the potential equation by means of
punched cards. Rev. Sci. Instr. 14, 248-250 (1943).

KORMES, J. P. and KORMES, M. Numerical solution of initial value problems by means of punched-card
machines. Rev. Sei. Instr. 16, 7-9 (1945).

KORN, A. Ueber eine Methode der successive Naherungen zur Losung linearer gewohnlicher und partieller
Differentialgleichungen, Sitzber. Berl. Math, Ges.: 15, 115-119 (1916); 16, 51-55 (1917).

KOVNER, S. S. On the technique of numerical integration of differential equations with . partial
derivatives, C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N. 8.) 37, 20-23 (1942).

KRON, G. Numerical solution of ordinary and partial differential equations by means of equivalent
circuits, Jour. Appl. Phys. 16, 172-186 (1945).

KRYLOFF, N. wal 19) géenéralisations de la méthode de Walther Ritz. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 164, 853-
856 (1917).

KRYLOFF, N, Sur quelques recherches récentes dans le domaine de la solution approchée des problémes
de la physique mathématique, Atti Congr. Intern. Mat. Bologna 1928, vol. 5. Bologna,
Zanichelli, 1931, p. 257=273,

KRYLOFF, N. and BOGOLIUBOFF, N. On Rayleigh's principle in the theory of differential equations of
mathematical physics and on Euler's method in the calculus of variations, Ann. of Math. (2)
29, 255-275 (1928).

LAHAYE, E. Sur l'application de la méthode des approximations successives & la résolution des équa-
tions aux derivées partielles linéaires du second ordre, Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., Cl. Sci.
(5) 27, 537-551 (1941).

LAPAURI, I. D. On numerical integration of differential equations of hyperbolic type. (Georgian.
Russian sumary.). Trav.Inst.Math. Tbilissi (Trudy Tbiliss, Mat. Inst.) 10, 93-109 (1941).

LEMKE, A. Experimentelle Untersuchungen zur W. Ritzschen Theorie der Transversalschwingungen quad-
ratischer Platten, Ann. der Phys. (4) 86, 717~750 (1928).

LEWY, H. Over einen Ansatz zur numerischen Losung von Randwertproblemen. Gott. Nachr. 1925, 118-121,

LEWY, H. Uber die Methode der Differenzengleichungen zur Losung von Variations— und Randwertprob=
lemen, Math. Ann. 98, 107-124 (1927).

LIEBMANN, H. Die angenaherte Ermittlung harmonischer Funktionen, und konformer Abbildungen (nach
, Ideen von Boltzmann und Jacobi). Sitzber. Akad. Wiss, Minchen 1918, 385-416,

IOVE, A. E. H. The application of the method of W. Ritz to the theory of the tides. Proc. Intern,
Congr. Math. Cambridge 1912, vol. 2. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1913, p. 202-208.

LUCKERT, H. J. Uber die Integration der Differentialgleichungen einer Gleitschicht in zaher Flussig-
keit. Schr. Math. Sem. Inst, Math., Univ. Berlin 1, 245-274 (1933).

MACDONALD, J. K. L. Successive approximations by the Rayleigh-Ritz variation method. Phys. Rev. (2)
43, 830-833 (1933).

MACDONALD, J. K. L, On the modified Ritz variation method. Phys. Rev. (2) 46, 828 (1934).
390

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MACI, G. Sulla integrazione approssimata delle equazioni differentiali a derivate parziali. Boll.
Mat, (Firenze) 32, 1-3 (1936).

MAIER, E. Biegeschwingungen von spannungslos verwundenen Stdben, insbesondere von Luftschraubenblat-
tern. Ing. Arch. 11, 73-98 (1940).

MEYER ZUR CAPELLEN, W. Methode zur angenaherten Losung von Eigenwertproblemen mit. Anwendungen auf
Schwingungsprobleme. Ann, der Phys. (5) 8, 297-352 (1931).

Lt u 2 2 2
MIKELADZE, S. E. Uber die numerische Losung der Differentialgleichung dtu yy dtu 4 3 U-dgfc.u.z).
*c. Re (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS, (N.S.) 1h, 177-179 (1937). 9%*  By* Oz? Hf $7)

MIKELADZE, S. E. Boer numerische Integration der Laplaceschen und Poissonschen Gleichungen. Cc. R.
(Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS, (N.S.) 14, 181-182 (1937).

MIKELADZE, S. E. Weer die mumerische Losung der Differentialgleichungen von Laplace und Poisson,
(Russian. German summary.). Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS, Sér. Math. (Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR)
1938, 271-292 (1938).

MIKELADZE, S. E. ber die Losung von Randwertproblemen mit der Differenzenmethode. C. R. (Doklady)
, Acad. Sci. URSS,(N.S.) 28, 400-402 (1940).

MIKELADZE, S. E. On the question of numerical integration of partial differential equations by
means of nets. (Russian). Witt. Georg. Abt. Akad. Wiss. USSR 1, 249-254 (1940).

MIKELADZE, S. E. Numerische Integration der Gleichungen vom elliptischen und parabolischen Typus.
(Russian, German summary.), Bull. Acad. Sci. URSS, Sér. Math. (Izvestia Akad, Nauk SSSR)
5, 57-74 (1941).

MILNE, W. E. On the numerical solution of a boundary problem.Amer, Math. Month. 38, 14-17 (1931).

MINORSKY, N. Control problems. Jour. Franklin Inst. 232, 451-487, 519-551 (1941).

VON MISES, R. and POLLACZEX-CGEIRINGER, H. Praktische Verfahren der Gleichungsauflosung. Zeit.
Angew. Math, Mech. 9, 152-164 (1929).

MORGANS, W. R. On the solution of second order differential equations satisfying boundary conditions.
Phil. Mag. (7) 32, 483-488 (1941).

MORROW, J. On the lateral vibration of bars of uniform and varying sectional area. Phil, Mag.(6) 10,
113-125 (1905).

MORROW, J. On the lateral vibration of loaded and unloaded bars, Phil. Mag. (6) LL, 354-374 (1906).

MORROW, J. On the lateral vibration of bars subjected to forces in the direction of their axis. PhiL
Mag. (6) 12, 233-243 (1906).

ten ee ot ous

- = _ * _ mm am a maw A +
WoRnOW, J. On the lateral deflection and vibration of "clamped-directed" bars, Phil. Meg (6) 18

452-465 (1909). —— ?

MOSKOVITZ The numerical solution of Laplace's and Poisson's equations. Quart. Appl. Math. 2,

De
"148-163 (1944).
NEWING, R. A. On the variation calculation of eigenvalues. Phil. Mag. (7) 24, 114-127 (1937).

NEWING, S. T. Determination of the shearing stresses in axially s trical shafts under torsion by
finite difference methods. Phil. Mag. (7) 32, 33-A9 (1941).

PANoW, D. Uber die angenaherte numerische Lésung des Problems der Warmeleitung. Zeit. Angew. Math.
Mech, 12, 185-188 (1932).

PASCHOUD, i. Application de 1a méthode de Walther Ritz au probleme du régime uniforme dans un tube
& section carrée. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 159, 158-160 (1914),
391

BIBLIOGRAPHY

PASTERNAK, P. Vereinfachte Berechmung der Biegebeanspruchung in diinnwandigen, kreisrunden Behiltern.
Proc, Intern, Congr. Appl. Mech. Zurich, 1926, Zurich, Fissli, 1927, p. 427-433.

PELLEW, A, and SOUTHWELL, R. VY. Relaxation methods applied to engineering problems. VI. The natural
frequencies of systems having restricted freedom, Proc.Roy.Soc. Lond. 175A, 262-290 (1940).

PFEIFFER, F. Zur numerischen Integration hyperbolischer partieller Differentialgleichungen zweiter
Ordmung. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 18, 233-236 (1938).

PHILLIPS, ra 3 WIENER, N. Nets and the Dirichlet problem. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.)2, 105-124,

PICARD, E. Mémoire sur la théorie des equations aux dérivées partielles et la méthode des approxi-
mations successives, Jour. Math. Pures Appl. (4) 6, 145-210, 231 (1890).

PLANCHEREL, M. Sur la méthode dtinteégration de Ritz. Bull, Sei, Math. (2): 47, 376-383, 397-412
(1923)3 48, 12-48, 58-80, 93-109 (1921).

POLHAUSEN, B. E, Berechnung der Eigenschwingungen statisch bestimmter Fachwerke. Zeit, Angew, Math.
Mech. 1, 28-42 (1921).

PRASAD, or The numerical solution of partial differential equations. Phil. Mag. (7) 9, 1074-1081
193

LORD RAYLEIGH. On the calculation of the frequency of vibration of a system in its gravest mode with
an example from hydrodynamics. Phil. Mag. (5) 47, 566-572 (1899).

LORD Rae ( any? calculation of Chladni's figures for a square plate. Phil. Mag. (6) 22, 225—
229 (1911).

RICHARDSON, L. F. The approximate arithmetical solution by finite differences of physical problems
involving differential equations with an application to the stresses ina masonry dam,Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 210A, 307~357 (1910), ;

RICHARDSON, (9 sor to solve differential equations approximately by arithmetic, Math.Gaz. 12,415=
421 (1925).

RICHARDSON, R. G. D. A new method in boundary problems from differential equations. Trans.Amer,Math.
Soc. 18, 489-518 (1917). :

RITZ, W. Ober eine neue Methode zur Losung gewisser Variationsprobleme der mathematischen Physik.
Jour Reine Angew. Math. 135, 1-61 (1908), or Gesammelte Werke,Paris, Gauthier-Villars.1911,
Pe 192-250.

RITZ, We Wer eine neue Methode zur Lésung gewisser Randwertaufgaben, Gott. Nachr. 1908, p. 236-248,
or Ges. Werke, 1911, p. 251-264.

RITZ, W. Theorie der Transversalschwingungen einer quadratischen Platte mit freien Randern. Ann,
der Phys, (4) 28, 737-78 (1909), or Ges. Werke, 1911, p. 265-316,

ROSENBLATT, A. Sur l'application de la méthode dee approximations successives de M. Picard & 1' étude
de cortaines yrations non linéaires du quatriéme ordre. Bull. Sci. Math. (2) 58, 117-136,
151-1 934)»

ROSENBLATT, A. Sur les equations biharmoniques non linéeires & deux variables indépendantes.Bull.
Sci. Math. (2) 58, 248-264 (1934).

LE ROUX, J. = Sur le probléme de Dirichlet. Jour. Math. Pures Appl. (6) 10, 189-230 (1914).

RUNGE, C. and WILLERS, F. A. Numerische und graphische Quadratur und Integration gewohnlicher und
partieller Differenti eichungen. Ency, Math. Wiss. Leipzig, Teubner, 1915, vol. II(3) 2;
article II C2, p. 47-176.

SHERWOOD, T. K. and REED, C. E. Applied Mathematics in Chemical Engineering. New York, McGraw-Hill,
1938, xi + 403 p., pe 241-255,
392

BIBLIOGRAPHY

SHORTLEY, G. H. and WELIER, R. The numerical solution of Laplace's equation. Jour. Appl. Physe 9,
334-348 (1998).

SHORTLEY, G. H. and WELLER, R. Calculation of stresses within the boundary of photoelastic models.
Jour. Appl. Mech. 61, A71-A78 (1939).

SHORTLEY, G. H., WELLER, R. and FRIED, B. Numerical solution of Laplace's and Poisson's equations
with applications to photoelasticity and torsion, Ohio State Univ. Studies, Engrg. Series,
vol, 11, No. 5. Engrg. Exp. Station, Bull. No. 107. Columbus, Ohio, 1940, iii + 51 p.

SIDDIQI, M. R. Boundary Problems in Non~linear Partial Differential Equations. Lucknow Univ. Studies,
No. ll. Allahabad, India, Allahabad Law Journal Press, 1939, xiv +136 p.

SOKOLNIKOFF, I. S. On a solution of laplace's equation with an application to the torsion problem
for a polygon with reentrant angles. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 33, 719-732 (1931).

SOUTHWELL, R. V. Relaxation Methods in Engineering Science. A Treatise on Approximate Computation.
Oxford Engrg. Sci. Ser., New York, Oxford Univ. Press, 1940, vii + 252 p., chap. Vil, VII.

SOUTHWELL, R. V. New pathways in aeronautical theory. Fifth Wright Brothers Lecture. Jour. Aeronaut.
Sei. 9, 77-89 (1942).

SOUTHWELL, R. V. and VAISEY, G. Relaxation methods applied to engineering problems. VIII. Plane-
; pe involving specified norm] gradients. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 162A, 129-
151 (1943).

TAMARKIN, J. D. and FELLER, W. Partial Differential Equations, (Mimeo.) Providence, Brown Univ.,
1941, chap. V, pe 160-1%.

TEMPLE, G. The general ta9358 of relaxation methods applied to linear systems. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond,
169A, 476-500 (1939).

THOM, A. The flow past circular cylinders at low speeds. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 143A, 651-669 (1933).

THORNE, C. J. and ATANASOFF, J. V. A functional method for the solution of thin plate problems ap-
plied to a square, clamped plate with 4 central point lead, Iowa State Coll. Jour. Sei-lkh,;

333-343 (1940).
TIMOSHENKO, S. A membrane analogy to flexure. Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 20, 396-407 (i921).

TIMOSHENKO, S. The approximate solution of two-dimensional problems in elasticity. Phil.Mag. (6) 47,
1095-1104 (1924).

TIMOSHENKO, S. ‘Theory of Plates and Shelis, New Tork, MeGraw-Hill, 1940, xii + 492 ps, p. 180-187.

TREFFIZ, E.., Ein Gegenstiick gum Ritz'schen Verfahren. Proc. Intern. Congr. Appl. Mech. Zurich, 1926.
Zurich, Fuseli, 1927, p. 131-137.

TREPFTZ.

wee bees

ir 2) Konvergenz und Fehlerabschitzung beim Ritzschen Verfahren. Math. Ann. 100, 503-522
1928).

TREFFTZ, E. ther Fehlerabschatzung bei Berechnung von Eigenwerten, Math. Ann. 108, 595-601 (1933).

TREFFTZ, E. Die Bestimmung der Knicklast gedruckter, rechteckiger Platten. Zeit. Angew. Math, Mech.
15, 339-344 (1935).

VASILESCO, F. Sur une méthode de M, Riabouchinsky ayant pour but de résoudre le probleme de Dirich-
tis3 : wue du calcul du potentiel des vitesses, C.R. Acad. Sei, Paris 193, 1162-116,
1931).

VAZSONYI, ) A numerical method in the theory of vibrating bodies, Jour. Appl. Phys. 15, 598-606
19kd,) «
393

BIBLIOGRAPHY

VERNOTTE, P, Méthode tres générale pour étudier le début des perturbations régies par les équations
aux derivées partielles de la physique mathématique. Application 4 la chaleur et & 1'hydro-
dynamique. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 210, 42-44 (1940).

VOIGT, W. Die Grundschwingungen kreisformiger Klangplatten aus Kristallen. Gott.Nachr. 1915,345-391.

WASCHAKIDZE, D. Uber die numerische Lésung der biharmonischen Gleichung, (Russian. German sum-
mary.). Trav. Inst. Math. Toilissi (Trudy Tbiliss, Mat. Inst.) 9, 61-73 (1941).

WEINSTEIN, D. H. Modified Ritz method. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 20, 529-532 (1934).

WEINSTEIN, (a3 so a minimal problem in the theory of elasticity. Jour. Lond. Math. Soc. 10, 184-192
1935).

WEINSTEIN, A, Les vibrations et le calcul des variations, Portugaliae Math. 2, 36-55 (1941).

WELLER, R., SHORTLEY, G. H. and FRIED, B. The solution of torsion problems by numerical integration
of Poisson's equation, Jour. Appl. Phys. 11, 283-290 (1940).

WOLF, Fe. | Wer die angenaherte numerische Berechnung harmonischer und biharmonischer Funktionen,
Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 6, 118~150 (1926).

23, INTEGRAL EQUATIONS

BAIRSTOW, L. and BERRY, A. Two dimensional solutions of Poisson's and Laplace's equations. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. 95A, 457-475 (1919).

BATEMAN, H. Report on the history and present state of the theory of integral equations, British
Assoc. Rep. 1910, pe 345-42k.

BATEMAN, H. oe ops) nmersoat solution of linear integral equations. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 1lOOA, 441-
ALB (1922).

uw
BLOCK, H. ( Sur la solution de certaines equations fonctionnelles, Arkiv for Mat. 3, No. 22,18 p.,
1907).

BLUMENTHAL, On Boer die Knickung eines Balkens durch Langskrafte. Zeit.Angew. Math. Mech. 17, 232-
24h (1937).

BOCHER, M An Introduction to the Study of Integral Equations. Cambridge Math. Tracts No. 10,
London, Cambridge Univ, Press, 2nd ed. 1914, reprint 1926, 70 pe, p. 13-19, 24-37.

BOGGIO, T. Integrazione dell'equazione funzionale che regge la caduta di una sfera in un liquido
wiscoso, Rend, Accad. dei Lincei Roma (5) 16-2, 613-620, 730-737 (1907).

COLLATZ, Le Vergleich der Integralgleichungsmethode von Bucerius mit dem Ritzschen Verfahren zur
genaherten Losung von Differentialgleichungen. Astr. Nachr, 271, 126-120 (1941).

COLLET, A. Sur les solutions approchees de certaines equations intégrales non linéaires. Ann.Toulouse
(3) hy 199-249 (1912).

CROUT, P. D. An application of polynomial approximation to the solution of integral equations
arising in physical problems. Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 19, 34-92 (1940).

DAVIS, H. T. A Survey of Methods for the Inversion of Integrals of the Volterra Type. Indiana Univ.
Studies, 14, No. 76-77, 72 pe (1927).

VAN DEN DUNGEN, F. H. Les equations intégrales a plusieurs peramétres et la technique des vibrations.
Proc, Intern. Congr. Appl. Mech, Zurich 1926, Zurich, Fissli, 1927, p. 113-118.

ENSKOG, D. Kinetische Theorie der Vorginge in missig verdunnten Gasen. (Diss. Uppsala). Uppsala,
Almguist and Wiksells, 160 p., 1917.
394

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ENSKOG, D. Die numerische Berechnung der Vorgange in missig verdinnten Gasen. Arkiv for Mat. 16,
No. 16, 60 p., 1921.

ENSKOG, D. ‘Eine allgemeine Methode zur AuriSsung von linearen Integralgleichungen. Math. Zeit. 2h,
670-685 (1926).

FRANK, P. and VON MISES, R. Die Differential- und Integralgleichungen der Mechanik und Physik, vol.
1. Braunschweig, Vieweg, 2nd ed. 1930, p. 555-562.

FREDHOLM, I. Sur une nouvelle méthode pour ne résolution du probléme de Dirichlet. Ofversigt af
Kongl. Svenska Vetenskaps Akademiens Forhandlingar 57, 39-46 (1900).

FREDHOLM, I. Sur une classe d'équations fonctionnelles. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 134, 1561-1564 (1902).

FREDHOLM, Sur une classe de transformations rationnelles. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 13h, 219-222

I.
(1902).
FREDHOIM, I, Sur une classe d'!équations fonctionnelles. Acta Math. 27, 365-39 (1903).

GORGIDZE, A. I. and RUCHADZE, A. K. On a numerical solution of integral equations of the plane
probiem of the theory of elasticity. (Russian.). Mitt. Georg. Abt. Akad. Wiss. USSR 1, 255-

258 (1940).

GYLLENBERG, W. Uver eine graphische Losung einer Integralgleichung. Astr. Nachr, 269, 52-53 (1939).

HAVELOCK, T. H. The solution of an integral equation occurring in certain problems of viscous fluid
motion. Phil. Mag. (6) 42, 620-628 (1921).

HECKE, E. Uber die Integrelgleichung der Kinetischen Gastheorie. Math. Zeit. 12, 274-286 (1922).
> e

HELLINGER, E, and TOEPLITZ, 0. Integralgleichungen und Gleichungen mit unendlichvielen Unbekannten
Eney. Math. Wiss. vol. 2 (3), article II C13, 1335-1597 (1927).

HILBERT, D. Grundzuge einer allgemeinen Theorie der linearen Integralglei chungen. Gott.Nachr.190h,

HILDEBRAND, F. Be The approximate solution of singular integral equations arising in engineering
practice. Proc, Amer, Acad. Arts Sei. 7h, 287-295 (1941).

HILDEBRAND, F. B. and CROUT, P. D. A least square procedure for solving integral equations by
polynomial approximation, Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 20, 310-335 (1941).

HILL, G. W. Onthe part of the motion of the lunar perigee which is a function of the mean motions
ef the sun and moon. Acta, Math. 8, 1-36 (1886).

HITCHOCK, F. L. A method for the numerical solution of integral equations, Jour. Math. Phys.
QEI.T.) 1, 88-104 (1922).

HORT, W. Die Differentialgleichungen des Ingenieurs, Berlin, Springer, 2nd ed. 1925, xii + 700 p.,
Pe 639-007.

HOWLAND, R. C. de Application of an integral equation to the whirling speeds of shafts. Phil. Mag.
(7) 3, 513-528 (1927).

INGRAM, saree ) On the integral equations of continuous dynamical systems, Phil. Mag. (7) 30, 16-38
1940).

KIESSLING, F., Eine Methode zur Approximativen Berechnung einseitig eingespanneter Druckstibe mit
veranderlichem Querschnitt. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech, 10, 594-599 1930).

KNOTT, C. G. ‘Phe propagation of earthquake waves through the earth and connected problems. Proc,
Roy. Soc. Edin, 39, 157~208 (1919).
W
KONIG, M. Ther ein neues Verfahren zur Ermittlune von Sehwineungsperioden von Turbinenscheiben.

tt

Proc,.. Intern. Congr. Appl. Mech. Zurich 1926. Zurich, Fussli, 1927, pe 173-177.
395

BIBLIOGRAPHY

KORN, 4. Uber freie und erzwangene Schwingungen. Leipzig, Teubner, 1910, v + 136 p., pe 50-136. -

KORN, A. Woer die Anwendung der Methode der sukzessiven Naherungen gur Lésung von linearen Inte-
gralgleichungen mit unsymmetrischen Kernen, Arch. Math. Phys. (3): 25, 148-173 (1917);
27, 97-120 (1918).

KOSTITZIN, V. A. Applications des equations intégrales. (Applications statistiques), Mém, Sci.Math.
fasc. 69, 48 p. (1935).

MAGNUSSON, P. C. A numerical method of solving integral equations in two independent variables,
Jour. Math. Phys. (M.I.T.) 21, 250-263 (1942).

MEYER ZUR CAPELLEN, W. Kleine Anderungen des Kerns einer symmetrischen homogenen, linearen Inte-
gralgleicmng. Zeit. Angew. Math. Mech. 13, 323-324 (1933).

MICHE, R. Le caleuvl pratique de problémes élastiques 4 deux dimensions par la méthode des équations
intégrales. Proc. Intern. Congr. Appl. Mech. Zlrich 1926. Ziirich, Fussli, 1927, 126-130.

MIKELADZE, S. E. De la resolution numérique des equations integrales, (Russian. French summry.).
Bull. Acad, Sei. URSS (Izvestia Akad, Nauk SSSR) (7) 1, 255~300 (1935).

MUNTZ, C. Solution directe de 1'équation séculaire et de quelques problémes analogues transcendantes.
C. R. Acad. Sei. Paris 156, 43-46 (1913).

NYSTROM, E. J. Ser die praktische Auflosung von linearen gleichungen mit Anwendungen auf Rand-
wertaufgaben der Potentialtheorie, Soc, Sci, Fennica Comment. Phys.-Math. 4, No. 15,
52 pe (1928).

nystrbu, E. Je Uber die praktische Auflosung von Integralgleichungen. Soc. Sci. Fennica Comment.
Phys.-Math. 5, No. 5, 22 p. (1929).

NYSTROM, E. J. Uber die praktische Auflosung yon Integralgleichungen mit Anwendungen auf Rand-

wertaufgaben. Acta Math. 54, 185-204 (1930).

OBERG, E. N. (198 jpproximate solutions of integral equations (abstract), Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.39,

513 (1933).

PEKERIS, C. L. A pathological case in the mmerical solution of integral equations, Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci, U.S.A. 26, 433-437 (1940).

PICARD, K. Sur une équation fonctionnelle, C, R. Acad. Sci, Paris 139, 245-248 (1904).

PRAGER, me 8) Die Druckverteilung an Korpern in ebener Potentialstroming. Phys. Zeit. 29, 865-869
1928).

PRASAD, G. On the numerical solution of integral equations. Proc.Edin, Math. Soc. 42, 46-59 (192k).

PRASAD, G. On the numerical solution of integral equations. Proc. Intern. Congr.Math. Toronto
1924, vol. 1. Toronto, Univ. of Toronto Press, 1928, p. 683.

REIZ, A. On the numerical solution of certain types of integral equations, Arkiv for Mat, 29 A,
No. 29, 21 p. (193).

SCHMIDT, E. Zur Theorie der linearen und nichtlinearen Integralgleichungen, Math. Ann.: 63, 433-
476 (1907); 64, 161-174 (1907).

SCHROEDER, K. Uber die Prandtische Integro-Differentialgleichung der Tragfligeltheorie. Abh. Preuss.
Akad. Wiss, Math.-Nat. Kl. 1939, No. 16, 35 p.

SCHWERIN, E. Yer die Transversalschwingungen von Staben veranderlichen Querschnitts, Proc.
Intern, Congr. Appl. Mech. Zurich 1926, Zurich, Fiissli, 1927, p. 138145.

SERINI, R. Teoria del condensatore electrico a piatti circolari. Rend. Accad. dei Iincei Roma
(5) 29-2, 34-37, 257-261 (1920).
396
BIBLIOGRAPHY
TEOFILATO, P. Risoluzione grafica e numerica approssimata di un equazione integrale. Atti della
Pontificia Accad, Romana dei Nuovi Lincei 76, 36-45 (1922-1923).

TRICOMI, F. Sulla risoluzione numerica delle equazioni integrali di Fredholm. Rend, Accad, dei
Lincei Roma (5) 33-1, 483-486 (1924).

TRICOMI, F. Ancora sulla risoluzione numerica delle equazioni integrali di Fredholm, Rend, Accad.
dei Lincei Roma (5) 33-2, 26-30 (1924).

VITERBI, A. Sulla risoluzione approssimata delle equazioni integrali di Volterra e sulla appli-
cagione di questa allo studio analitico delle curve, Rend. Ist. Lombardo (2) 45, 1027-1060

(1912).

WHITTAKER, E. T. On the numerical solution of integral-~equations. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 94A,367~
383 (1918).

WHITTAKER, E. T. and ROBINSON, G. The Calculus of Observations, Glasgow, Blackie, 3rd ed. 1942,

WIARDA, G. Integralgleichungen, unter besondere Bericksichtigung der Anwendungen. Leipzig, Teubner,
Sammlung Math.-phys. Lehrbucher, 1930, 183 p.
397

ABBREVIATIONS

Abh. Akad. Munchen: Abhandlungen der Gesellschaft Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Math-
ematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Abteilung.

Abh. Ges. Wiss. Leipzig: Abhandlungen der mathematisch-physischen Klasse der Sachsischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften,

Acad. Roum. Bull. Sect. Sci.: Académie Roumaine Bulletin de la section scientifique. Bucharest.

Acad. Roy. Belgique Cl. Sci, Mém Coll.: Académie Royale de Belgique. Classe des Sciences. Mémoires
collections en 4° et 8,

Acad Sci. RSS Ukraine Rec. Trav. (Zbirnik Prace) Inst. Math.: Académie des Sciences de 1'Ukraine.
Institut mathématique, Recuillis Travaux, (Akademija Nauk URSR. Institut Matematiki Zbir-
nik Prace).

Acta Math.: Acta Mathematica, Uppsala.

Acta Soc. Sci. Fennicae: Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae. A: Opera Physico-mathematica. Hel-
singfors (Helsinki).

Acta Univ. Szeged Sect. Sci, Math: Acta Litterarum ac Seientiarun Regiae Universitatis Hungaricae
Francisco-Iosephinae. Sectio Scientiarum Mathematicarum, Szeged.

Aircraft Energ.: Aircraft Engineering. London.
Amer. Jour. Math.: American Journal of Mathematics. Baltimore.

Amer. Math, Month: The American Mathemtical Monthly. The Official Journal of the Mathematical
Association of America,

Ann. de Gergonne: Annales de Mathematiques Pures et Appliquées. Recueil Periodique, Redigé et Pub-
lige par J, D. Gergonne.

Ann, de 1'0bserv.: Annales de 1'Observatoire de Paris.

Ann. de Phys.: Annales de Physique, Paris.

. der Phys.: Annalen der Physik. Leipzig.

- Ecole Norm. Sup.: Annales Scientifiques de 1'Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris,

BB E

« Harvard Coll. Obs. Annals of the Astronomical Observatory of Harvard College,

Ann. Math. Statist.: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, The Official Journal of the Institute
of Mathematical Statistics, Baltimore, ;

Ann. Mat. Pura Appl.: Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata. Bologna.
Amn, of Math.: Annals of Mathemtics, Princeton.
Ann. Sel. Univ. Jassy: Annales Scientifiques de l'Université de Jassy.

Ann, Toulouse: . Annales de la Faculte des Sciences de l'Université de Toulouse pour les Sciences
Mathematiques et les Sciences Physiques.

An. Soc. Sci. Argentina: Anales de la Sociedad Cientifica Argentina, Adoptados para sus Publicac-
iones por la Academia Nacional de Ciencias Exactas, Fisicas y Naturales. Buenos Aires,

Appl. Math. Mech. (Akad, Nauk SSSR Prikl, Mat. Mech.): Applied Mathematies and Mechanics (Priklad-
naia Matematika i Mekhanika).

Arch, Math, Phys.: Archiv der Mathematik und Physik mit, besonderer Ricksicht auf die Bedlirfnisse
der Lehrer an héheren Unterrichtsanstalten, Gegrundet 181 durch J, A. Grunert.

Arch, Sci. Phys. Nat. Genéve: Bibliothdque Universelle. Archives des Sciences Physiques et Nature-
lies. Geneva.
398

ABBREVIATIONS

Astr, Jour.: Astrophysical Journal. An International Review of Spectroscopy and Astronomical Phys-
ies. University of Chicago Press.

Astr, Jour, Soviet Union: Astronomical Journal of the Soviet Union (Akademiia Nauk SSSR. Astronom
iceskii Zhurnal.). Moscow.

Astr. Nachr.: Astronomische Nachrichten, Kiel.

Atti Accad. Sei. Torino: Atti della Reale Accademia della Scienze di Torino. I: Classe di Scienze,
Fisiche, Matemtiche e naturali.

Beitrage ny Geo nyse: Dettrlge zur angewandten Geophysik. (Started as Gerlands Beitrage zur Geo~
) ° PZige
PL ell

Beitr. Physik frei. Atmosph.: Beitrage zur Physik der freien Atmosphare. Zeitschrift fur
forschung der hoheren lnftschichten und der Stromungserscheinungen in der
Leipzig.

die Er-

tmosphiire.

Ber. Yerh. Sacchs, Akad. Wissen. Leipsig: Berichte fiber die Verhandlungen der Sachsischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig. Mathematisch-physische Klasse,

Boll, Mat.: Il Bolletino di Matematica. Giornale Scientifico-didattico per l'Incremento degli Studi
Matemitici nelle Scuole Medie... Florence.

Boll. Un. Mat. Ital.: Bolletino della Unione Matematica Italiana, Bologna.

Brit. Assoc, Rep.: British Association for the Advancement of Science. Report of the Annual Meet=
ing. London.

Bull. Acad, Sei. URSS Sér, Math. (Izvestia Akad. Nauk SSSR): Bulletin de l'Acaddmie des Sciences
de 1'URSS, Classe des Sciences mthématiques et naturelles.

Bull, Internat, Acad. Sel. Cracowie, C1. Sei, Math. Nat.: Bulletin International de l'Académie des
Sciences de Cracovie. Classe des Sciences Mathemtiques et Naturelles, Polska Akademja
Umiejetnosci. Cracow.

Bull, Intern, Acad. Polon, Sci. Lett., Cl. Sci. Math. Nats: Bulletin International de 1! Academie
Polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres. Classes des Science Mathématiques et Naturelles,
Série A: Sciences Mathematiques. Polska Akademja Umiejetnosci, Cracow.

Bull. Amer. Math. Sec.: Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society.

Bull. Caleutta Math. Soce: Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society.

oes oe ome oe oes ows an, - = eee ee meen In be Loan
Bulli. Gi. Sei.-Pnys. Math. Kieff: Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences Physiques st Mathamtiques.

(Ukrainska Akademiia Nauk, Zapiski Fizicno-matematicnogo Viddiln.). Kiev.

Bull. Math. Phys, Ecole Polyt. Bucharest: Bulletin de Mathématiques et de Physiques Pures et Ap-
pliquées de 1'Ecole Polytechnique Roi Carol II, Bucarest.

Bull. Nat. Res. Council: Bulletin of the National Research Council. Washington, D. C.

Bull. Sei. Ec, Timigoara: Bulletin Scientifique de 1'Ecole Polytechnique de Timigoara, Timisoara,
Roumania.

Bull. Sei. Math.: Bulletin des Sciences Mathémtiques. (Started as Bulletin des Sciences Mathémat-
iques et Astronomiques.). Paris.

Bull. Soc. Math, France: Bulletin de Ja Société Mathématiqe de France Publi¢ par les Secrétaires,
Paris.
399

ABBREVIATIONS

Bull, Soc. Sci. Cluj: Bulletin de la Société des Sciences de Cluj, (Buletiml Societ&tii de Stinte
din Cluj.).

Bull. Univ. Tashkent: Bulletin de l'Université de l'Asie Centrale. (Biulletini Sredne-Aziatskogo
Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta.). Tashkent.

Casopis pest, mat. a fys.: Casopis pro Péstovdni Matematiky a Fysiky v Praze. Prague.
Comment. Acad. Sci, Petropol.: Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae.

Comment. Math. Helv.: Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici. Editi Societate Mathematica Helvetica.
Zurich.

C. R. Acad. Sci, Paris: Comptes Rendus Hebdomaires des Séances de 1'Académie des Sciences par MM,
les Secrétaires Perpetuéls, Paris,

Danske Vid, Selsk, Math.-Fys. Medd.: Det Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. Matematisk-fysiske
Meddelser, Copenhagen.

Deutsche Math.: Deutsche Mathematik, Im Auftrage der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft,
Duke Math. Jour.: Duke Mathematical Journal, Durham, N. C.
Edin, Math. Tracts: Edinburgh Mathematical Tracts.

Electrotech. Zeit.: Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift. Organ des Elektrotechnischen Vereins seit 1880
und des Verbandes Deutscher Elektrotechniker seit 1894.

L'ins, Math.: L'Enseignement Mathématique. Organ Officiel de la Commission Internationale de 1'En-
seignement Mathématique. Paris and Geneva.

Ergebnisse der Math,: Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete, Berlin.
Gaz. Mat.: Gazeta Matematica Apare Odat& pe Luna. Bucharest.

Gott. Nachr.: Nachrichten von der Gessellschaft der Wissenschaften gu Gottingen. Mathematisch-Physi-
kalische Klasse,

Greenwich Observations: Observations made at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich in the year » in
Astronomy, Magnetism, and Meteorology.

Indian Jour. Phys.: Indian Journal of Physics and Proceedings of the Indian Association for the
Cultivation of Science.

Ing.-Arch.: Ingenieur-Archiv. Berlin.

Jap. Jour, Math.: Japanese Journal of Mathematics. Tokyo.

Jber. Deutsch. Math. Verein,: Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker—Vereinigung. Leipzig.

Jour. Aeronaut., Sci.: Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences. Easton,, Penn.

Jour, Amer, Statist. Assoc.: Journal of the Anierican Statistical Association. Washington, D. C.
Jour, Appl. Mech.: Journal of Applied Mechanics. Publ. as Supplement to Trans, Amer, Soc.Mech.Engrs.
Jour, Apple Phys.: Journal of Applied Physics, American Institute of Physics, New York,

Jour. Brit. Astr. Assoc.: Journal of the British Astronomical Association.

dour, Exp, Teor. Phys.: Zhurnal Eksperimental'noi i Teoreticeskoi Fisiki., Akademiia Nauk SSSR Len=
ingrad,.

Jour. Ecole Polytech. Paris: Journal de L'Ecole Polytechnique Publié par le Conseil d'Instruction de
cet Etablissement. Paris,
400
ABBREVIATIONS

Jour. Franklin Inst.: Journal of the Franklin Institute devoted to Science and the Mechanic Arts.
Philadelphia.

Jour, Inst. Actuar.: Journal of the Institue of Actuaries. London,
Jour, Lond. Math. Soc.: The Journal of the London Mathemtical Society.

Jour, Math, Phys, (M.I.T.): Journal of Mathematics and Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
OZYe

Jour. Math. Pures Appl.: Journal de Mathemtiques Pures et Appliquées. Paris.

Jour, Mysore Univ. Sect. B: The Half-yearly Journal of the Mysore University. New Series.Section B=
Science.

Jour, Opt. Soc. Amer.: Journal of the Optical Society of America. American Institute of Physics. New
York. .

Jour. Reine. Angew. Math.: Journal fur die Reine und Angewandte Mathemtik. Berlin.

Jour. Roy. Aeronaut. Soc.: The Journal of the Royal Aeronautical Society with which is incorporated
The Institution of Aeronautical Engineers, A Monthly TLlustrated Magazine Devoted to All
Sudjects Connected with the Navigation of Air. London.

Jour. Sei, Instr.: Journal of Scientific Instruments, A Publication Dealing with their Principles,
Construction and Use and the Applications of Physics in Industry. Produced by the Institute
of Physics with the Cooperation of the National Physical Laboratory. Cambridge, Eng.

Lunds Univ. Arsskrift: Acta Universitatis Lundensis. Nova Series, Lunds Universitets Arsskrift. Ny
Foljd. Andra Avdelningen. Medicin Samt Matematiska och naturvetenskapliga ene

Mass, Inst. of ‘Tech. Publs. (Math.): Publications from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Contribution from the Department of Mathamtics,

Math. Ann.: Mathemtische Annalen. Berlin,

Mathematica (Cluj): Mathematica, Publicatie a Seminaruiui de iatematici ai Universitatii, Ciuj.
Math. Gaze: The Mathematical Gazette, London.

Math. Mag.: The Mathematical Magazine, A Journal of Elementary Mathematics. Washington, D. C.

Math, Naturwiss, Anz. Ungar. Akad. Wiss.: Mathematischer und naturwissenschaftlicher Anzeiger der
Ungarischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Budapest.

Math, Notae: Mathemticae Notae. Boletin del Instituto de Matematica, Universidad Nacional del Lito-
ral, Facultad de Ciencias Matematicas, Rosario, Argentina,

Math. Repository: New Series of the Mathemtical Repository. By Thomas Leybourn of the Royal Mili-
tary College. London.

Math. Student: The Mathematics Student. A Quarterly Dedicated to the Service of Students and Teachers
in India, Published by the Indian Mathematical Society. Madras.

Math. Visitor: The Mathemtical Visitor. Erie, Penn.

Math, Zeit.: Mathematische Zeitschrift. Berlin.
Mat, Tidsskr, B: Matematisk Tidsskrift B, Udgivet af Matematisk Forening i K¢benhavn.

Mem. Acad. Roy. Bruxelles: Mémoires de l'Académie Impdriale et Royale des Sciences et Belles-Lettres
de Bruxelles. :

Mém. Acad. St. Petersbourg: Mémoires de 1'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St. Pétersbourg. (Za~
piski Imperatorskoi Akademii Nauk.).

Mem, Coll. Sci. Kyoto Imperial Univ.: Memoirs of the College of Science. Kyoto Imperial University.
Series A.
401

ABBREVIATIONS

Mém. Acad. Sei, Kiev: Académie des Sciences d'Ukraine Mémoires de la Classe des Sciences Mathémati-
ques et Physiques (Trudy Fizichno-Mathemtichnii Viddil) or Mémoires de la classe des Sci-
ences Naturelles et Techniques (Trudy Prirodnichno-Tekhnichnii Viddil).

Mem, Roy. Met. Soc,: Memoirs of the Royal Meteorological Society. London.

Memorie Reale Accad. d'Italia: Reale Accademia d'Italia, Memorie della Classe di Scienze Fisiche,
Matematiche, ¢ Naturali. Rome. .

Mém. Sei. Math.: Mémorial des Sciences Mathématiques. Paris.
Mém, Soc. Royale Sci, Liége: Mémoires de la Société Royale des Sciences de Liége.
Mess. of Math.: The Messenger of Mathematics. Cambridge.

Meteorol, Zeit.: Meteorologische Zeitschrift. Im Auftrage der Deutschen Meteorologischen Gesells-
chaft, Munchen.

Mitt. Georg. Abt. Akad. Wiss.: Akademiia Nauk SSSR (Leningrad), Mitteilungen der Georgischen Abtei-
lung der Akademie der Wissenschaften der USSR. (Gruzinskii Filial. Soobsceniia...).

Mitt, Math. Ges. Hamburg: Mitteilungen der Mathemtischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg.

Mitt. Verein. Schweiz. Versich. Math.: Mitteilungen der Vereinigung Schweizerischer Versicherungs—
mathematiker. (Bulletin de 1'Association des Actuaires Suisses,), Bern,

Monatsh. Math. Phys.: Monatshefte fl Mathematik und Physik.

Month. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc.: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Containing Papers,
Abstracts of Papers and Reports of the Proceedings of the Society. London.

Month. Weather Rev.: Monthly Weather Review. U. S. Weather Bureau. Washington, D. C.
Nat. Math, Mag.: National Mathematics Magazine. (Formerly Mathematics News Letters.), Baton Rouge,

Nouv. Ann, Math.: Nouvelles Annales de Mathématiques.Journal des Candidats aux Ecoles Spéciales,
& la Licence et A 1'Agregation. Paris.

Nova Acta Acad. Sci. Petropol.: Nova Acta Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae,

Par, Mém. Sav. (Etr.): Mémoires Présentés par Divers Savants & l'Acaddnie des Sciences de l'Insti-
tut de France. (Mémoires des Savants Etrangers.). Paris.

Period. Mat.: Periodico di Mathemtiche. Storia, Didattica, Filosofia. Bologna.
Phil. Mag.: The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science.London.

Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc, Lond; Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. (Series A.
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.).

Phys. Reve: The Physical Review. A Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics... American
Physical Society. New York.

Portugaliae Math.: Portugaliae Mathematica. Lisbon.
Proc, Amer, Acad. Arts Sei; Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Boston.

Proc. Akad. Wet. Amsterdam: K, Akademie van Wetenschappen, Amsterdam. Proceedings of the Section of
Sciences,

Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc.: Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
Proc. Edin. Math. Soc.: Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathemtical Society.
402

ABBREVIATIONS

Proc. Ind, Acad. Scie: Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences. Section A. Hebbal, Bangalore,
India,

anc

Proc, Ind. Assoc. Scie: Proceedings of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science. Cal-
cutta.

Proc, Lond, Math. Soc.: Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society.

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U,S.As: Proceedings of the National Academy of Seiences of the United States
of America, Washington, D. C. ;

Proc, Phys.-Math. Soc. Japan: Proceedings of the Physico~Mathematical Society of Japan. Faculty of
Science, Tokyo Imperial University.

Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond.: Proceedings of the Physical Society. London.

Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin.: Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. (Section A. Mathematical and
Physical Sciemes.).

Proc, Roy. Soc. Lond.: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathemtical and Physi-
cal Sciences,

Proc. Tokyo Math.-Phys. Soc.: Proceedings of the Tokyo Mathematico-Physical Society.

Publ, Inst. Mat. Univ. Nac, Litoral: Publicaciones del Instituto de Matematica. Facultad de Ciencias
Matematicas etc,, de la Universidad National del Litoral. .

Quart. Appl. Math.: Quarterly of Applied Mathematics. Providence, R. I.

Quart. Jour. Math.: The Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics. London. Superseded by The
Quarterly Journal of Mathemtics, Oxford Series, Oxford.

Quart. Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society. London.

Rec. Math, (Mat. Sbornik): Académie des Sciences de 1'URSS. Recueil Mathématique (Akademija Nauk

SSSR. Matemticesidi Shornik.). Meseow.
Record Amer. Inst. Actuar.: The Record, American Institute of Actuaries. Chicago.

Rend. Accad, dei Lincei Roma: Atti della Reale Accademia Nazionale dei Lincel., Rendiconti. Classe di
Scienze, Fisiche, Matematiche e Naturali. Rome.

Rend, Circ. Mat. Palermo: Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo.
Rend, Ist. Lombardo: Reale Istituto Lombardo di Scienze e lettere, Rendiconti. Milan.
Rend. Sem. Math. Fis. Milano: Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico e Fisico di Milano,

Revista Ci, lima: Revista de Ciencias, Organo de la Facultad de Ciencias de la Universidad Nacional
Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Peru.

Revista Mat. Hisp.-Amer.: Revista Matematica Hispano-America, Publicada bajo los Auspicions de Ja
Sociedad Matemitica Espafiola y del Laboratorio-Seminario Matematico. Madrid.

Revista Union Mat. Argentina: Revista Union Matemftica Argentina. Buenos Aires,

Revista Univ. Catolica Peru: Revista de la Universidad Catélica del Peru. Lim.

Rev. Sci. Instr.: The Review of Scientific Instruments, American Institute of Physics. New York,
Sankyd: Sankya, The Indian Journal of Statistics. Calcutta.

Schr. Math, Sem. Inst. Angew. Math. Univ. Berlin: Schriften, des mathematischen Seminars und des In-
stituts fur angewandie Mathematik an der Universitat Berlin.
403
ABBREVIATIONS
Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Minchen: Akademie der Wissenschaften, Munchen, Sitzungsberichte der mathemati-
sch-naturiwissenschaftlichen Abteilung. Munich.

Sitzber. Akad. Wiss. Wien: Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften, Wien. Sitzungsberichte der math-
, ematisch-naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse. Vienna.

Sitzber. Berl. Math. Ges.: Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Mathematischen Gesellschaft. (Published as
a supplement to Archiv der Mathematik.und Physik, third series.).

Sitzber. bohm, Ges. Prag: Sitzungsberichte der Kéniglichen Bohmischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaf-
ten. Prague.

Sitzber, Heidelberg: Sitzungsberichte der Heidelbergen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathemtisch-
: naturwissenschaftliche Klasse.

Skand, Aktuarietidskr.: Skandinavisk Aktuarietidskrift. Utgiven av den Danske Aktuarforening, Fin-
lands Aktuarforening, den Norske Aktuarforening och Svenska Aktuarforeningen. Uppsala.

Soc. Sci. Fennica, Comment, Phys-Math.: Societatis Scientiarun Fennica. | Commentationes Physico=
Mathematicae. Helsingfors (Helsinki.). ;

Stockh. Akad. Forh.: Srversigt af Kongl. Vetenskaps~Akademiens Forhandlingar. Stockholm,

Terr, Magnetism: Terrestrial Magnetism and Atmospheric Electricity. An International Quarterly
Journal, Baltimore, etc.

Téhoku Math. Jour.: The T6hoku Mathemtical Journal, The Téhoku Imperial University, Sendai.
Trans. Actuar. Soc. Amer.: Actuarial Society of America. Transactions. New York,

Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.: Transactions of the American Mathemtical Society. New York.

Trans. Amer, Soc. Civil Engrs.: ‘Transactions of the American Society of Civil Engineers, New York,
Trans, Amer, Soc, Mech. Engrs,: American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Transactions.

Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc.: Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. Cambridge, Eng.

Trav. Inst. Math. Tbilissi (Trudy Tbiliss, Mat. Inst.): Akademija Nauk SSSR Leningrad. Gruzinski
filial. Matematischeskii Institut, Trudy.

Uchenye Zapiski Moscov. Univ. Mat.: Uchenye Zapiski Moscovskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta. Mos-
cow.

Univ.Nac. la Plata Publ. Fac. Ci. Fisicomat. Revista: Universidad Nacional de la Plata.Publicaciones
de la Faculdad de Ciencias Fisicomatematicas. Contributidn al Estudio de las Ciencias
Fisicas y Matemfticas, Serie Técnica. La Plata, Argentina.

Univ. Nac. Tucumfn Revista: Universidad Nacional de Tucumih, Revista. Serie A, Matematicas y Fisica
Teorica, Tucumin, Argentina.

Zeit Angew. Math. Mech.: Zeitschrift fur angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik. Ingenieurwissenschaft-
liche Forschungsarbeiten. Berlin.

Zeit. Angew, Met.: Zeitschrift fur angewandte Meteorologie-Das Wetter. Mit Unterstutzung des Reich~
samts fur Wetterdienst,

Zeit, Instrumentenkunde: Zeitschrift flr Instrumentenkunde. Organ fur Mitteilungen aus dem gesamten
. Gebiete der wissenschaftlichen Technik. Berlin.

Zeit. Math, Naturwiss, Unterricht: Zeitschrift fur mathematische und naturwissenschaftliche Unter=
richt aller Schulgattungen. Leipzig. ; ;

Zeit. Math. Phys.: Zeitschrift fur Mathematik und Physik... Organ fur angewandte Mathematik. Leip-
zig.
404

ABBREVIATIONS

Zeit. Phys.: Zeitschrift flr Physik, Herausgegeben unter Mitwirkung der Deutschen physikalischen Ges-
ellschaft. Berlin.

Zeit. Verein. Deutsch. Ing: Zeitschrift des Vereines Deutscher Ingenieure. Berlin.
INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

405

Chapter III discussed the operations of the various electrical components of the calculator, In

that discussion, the circuits were, for the sake of clarity, considerably abbreviated.

Elements not

necessary to the understanding of the principle of operation of any section of the machine were omit—

ted. Where circuits are duplicated, either exactly or with minor modifications, usually only one of

the duplicated circuits was discussed.

It is the purpose of these appendices to present,

so far as

possible, the circuits as they actually occur, rather than their simplified forms heretofore employed.

These appendices are given on the pages indicated in the following table..

Appendix No, Title Page
I Sequence Codes
Out Codes, A Relays 411
In Codes, B Relays 422
Miscellaneous Codes, C Relays 429
II Sequence Circuits
Start, Stop, Repeat Circuits 431
Automatic Circuits 433
III Register Circuits
Switch Circuits 437
Storage Counter Circuits LAL
High Accuracy Circuits 4L6
Choice Counter Circuits LL9
MIO Counter Circuits 451
Automatic Check Counter Circuits 455
Iv Multiply Unit Circuits
Multiplication 457
PQ Low Order Read-Out AOL
Normalizing Register 495
v Divide Unit Circuits 499

406

INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

Appendix No. Title Page
VI Relay List
Multiply Divide Panel 528
Heavy Duty 55
Sequence 546
Switch : ~ 546
Storage Counter 5k?
VII Cam List
CC Cam Contacts 550
SC Cam Contacts 554
VIIl WP-DIV Fuse List 555

Appendix IJ lists in tabular form the A, B andC relays energized by the reading of the various
sequence codes. Appendices II, III, IV and V indicate cycle by cycle the subsequent operations which
take place as a result of the pick up of these relays. In each of the appendices II, III, IV and V,
the following form is employed.

(a) The order in which the various relays are energized is stated in words.

(b) A timing diagram indicating that portion of the cycle during which each relay is energized
is given. The period of time during which each relay is energized through its pick up cir-
cuit is shom by a heavy bar covering the appropriate portion of the cycle. The period of
tine during which the relay is energized through its hold circuit is indicated by an outline

(ce) A circuit diagram is presented, showing graphically the pick up and hold circuits of each
relay. All relay points are shown in their normal (unenergized) positions.

Appendices VI, VII and VIII list the various relays, cams and fuses employed, together with the
purposes of each, Thus appendices I through V will enable the reader to trace an operation of the
calculator through the network of electric circuits involved, while appendices VI through VIII will
be useful in determining the purpose of a particular relay, cam or fuse.

From its inception to its completion, the circuits of the calculator have undergone a process of
constant evolution. In fact, changes are at the present time still being made. This is quite under-
standable, in view of the fact that the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator is the first general
purpose caleulator to be successfully completed and put into operation. This series of changes has, .

however, necessarily led to certain inconsistencies in the nomenclature of the various electrical

components of the calculator. To begin with, most of the electrical elements are designated by two
407

INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

separate names: first, a colloquial name brought about by common usage, such as "Q-control relay",
"X's right relay", "DD-carry control relay", etc.; second, a specific numerical designation which is
the outgrowth of the originally logical system of numbering the various parts of the calculator. It
is this latter designation that will be discussed here.

(1) Relay Coil Designations

1. Except for a relatively few heavy duty relays, all relays in the calculator are of a stand-
ard type, of which six varieties are employed; namely:

4, point single coil 4 point double coil
6 point single coil 6 point double coil
12 point single coil 12 point double coil.

2. When a double coil relay is used, one coil serves for pick up, the other for hold.

3. The coils of these relays are designated according to their use in the calculator by a com-
bination of letters and numbers, usually consisting of a group of letters followed by three
groups of numbers. [Each group is separated from the others by dashes, and the right hand
group is enclosed in parentheses; thus:

Seq~29-1-(12), B-3-1,2,3-(12).

4. The letter or group of letters on the left indicates the "section" of the machine in which
the relay is used, Sectional prefixes are given in the following tabulation.

Seq Sequence Relay

Swl, Sw2, «00, Sw60 Switch Relay

A Code Selection Relay (Out Relay)
B Code Selection Relay (In Relay)
c Code Selection Relay (Miscellaneous Relay)
SCl, SC2, ..., S5C72 Storage Counter Relay

Check Check Counter Relay

Choice Choice Counter Relay

Sp64, Sp65, Sp68, Sp69 Special Purpose Relay

Cr Carry Interlock Relay

(none) MP-DIV or Functional Relay

In several places in the appendices, the relays associated with switch A are referred to by
the prefix SwA, and the relays associated with storage counter A by the prefix SCA.

5. An exception to this system of literal prefixes is the prefix HD. In general this denotes a
heavy duty relay, and thus refers to the type relay employed, not to its place in the cir-
cuits of the calculator, The single relay HD~3-1-(4) we is, however, a wire contact rather
than a heavy duty relay, a fact denoted by the suffix we. This is the only relay prefixed
with HD that is not of the heavy duty type.

6. When it is required that more than 12 points operate simltaneously, a number of relays of
4, 6 or 12 points each are wired in parallel as a "bank", Reading from left to right, the
three groups of numbers in the relay designation denote respectively the number of the bank,
the numbers of the relays in the bank,and the number of points on each of these relays; thus:

(a) Seq-29-1-(12) denotes Sequence Relay Bank 29, one twelve point relay;

(bo)  Be3-1,2,3-(12) denotes Code Selection In, Bank 3, relays 1, 2 and 3, each of twelve
points. ,

7. As indicated in the tabulation of sectional prefixes, relays without literal prefix are ei-
ther MP-DIV or Fanctional relays. The banks of MP-DIV relays are numbered 1 through 104.
The banks of functional relays are numbered from 100 consecutively upward. Thus there are
408

8.

wo
.

INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

two completely independent banks of relays for each of the bank numbers 100, 101, 102, 103
and 104.

When relays of varying numbers of points are employed in the same bank, any one of several
alternate designations may be used.

(a) Several lines may be employed.

Sw8-1,2-(12)
Sw3-3-(4) denotes Switch Bank 8, relays 1 and 2 each of 12 points and relay 3
of 4 points.

(b) If the relays of the different varieties occur periodically within the bank, several
of the numbers 4, 6 and 12 may be placed in the parentheses in the order in which the
corresponding relays recur; thus:

5-1, o00,27-(12,12,4)
could be written in place of

5n1,2,4,5,7,8,10,11,13,14,16,17,19,20,22,23,25,26-(12)
5-3,6,9,12415,18,21,24,27-(li) 6

(c) Even though there is no periodicity in their recurrence, the relays of varying numbers
of points are sometimes written on one line; thus:

33-47, o20y70-(4,6 or 12) .

This is a non-specific designation, since it does not give information as to which of
the 24 relays have 4, 6 and 12 points respectively. In order to give a specific desig-
nation in this case, it is necessary that several lines be used.

There is one and only one instance of a bank in which the individual relays are not numbered
consecutively. This is bank 29 of the MP-DIV panel. This bank has in addition to the 36
relays, 29-1,...,36-(12,12,6), a single 4 point relay designated as 29-9(2)-(4), which
operates with relay 29-9-(6).

(2) Relay Point Designations

1.

In the interest of simplicity, the relay coils and their associated points are separated in
the following circuit diagrams. The designation of any relay point consists of a group of
letters followed by three groups of numbers, the groups being separated by dashes; thus:

C-1-l1-11, Seq-32-1-2.

The letter or group of letters and the two groups of numbers on the left refer respectively
to the section, bank and individual relay in question. The number on the right denotes the
particular point of that relay. The letters NC or NO are often suffixed to the point des-
ignation to denote normally closed or normally open respectively; thus:

(a) C-1-11-LINC denotes the normally closed side of the 1th point of the llth relay of
the lst bank of the Miscellaneous relays of the code selection cascade;

(b) Seq-32-1-2 denotes the 2nd point of the lst relay of the 32nd bank of the sequence
relays.

(3) Further Abbreviations

1.

2.

When only one relay is used in a bank, the number "“one™ of that relay will frequently be
omitted, Thus the relay Seq-31-1-(4) would be abbreviated to Seq-31-(4). The designation
of the third point of this relay would be shortened from Seq=3l~+1-3 to Seq-31-3.

There are several instances of only one bank in a section of the calculator, and only one
409

INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

relay in that bank. In these cases, both bank numbers and relay numbers may be omitted.
Thus the relay Check~1-l-(4}) is written Check-(4) and Choice-l-1-(6) is written Choice-(6).
Similarly, the 4th point of the check relay is written Check-4. and the third point of the
choice relay, Choice-3. .

(4) Cam Designations

1, As explained in Chapter III, the timing of the various operations of the machine is control-
led by cam contacts. Three series of these cam contacts are used. They are distinguished
on the following diagrams and lists by the prefixed letters:

(a) CC denotes computing cam contacts (used principally for timing the operations of the
MP-DIV unit);

(b) FC denotes functional cam contacts (used for timing the sequence and functional units);

(ce) SC denotes storage cam contacts (used for timing impulses through the storage counters
and switches),

2. The number following this pair of letters denotes a particular cam of the series, The num
bers in parentheses give the timing of the cam; thus:

(a) SC-12 (12-0) denotes storage cam contact number 11, makes at 12 time, breaks at O time;

(b) CC-39 (1/3 15 - 12) denotes computing cam contact mmber 39, makes 1/3 before 15 time,
breaks at 12 time,

3. Certain of the CC cams operate 16 times per cycle, In these cases, the letter L is used to
denote each one of the 16 subdivisions of the cycle in turn; thus:

(a) CC-23 (1/16 L - L.1/2) denotes cam contact number 23, makes 1/16 before line, breaks
1/2 after line; i.e.,

Makes Breaks
wie 8 3 Ye
1/16 0 ‘O12
1/16 16 16 1/2.

4. Closely associated cams are given the same group number, but distinguished from each other
by a letter following that number; thus:

(a) CC-24B (L 1/4 - L 7/8) denotes B cam contact of group 24, makes 1/4 after line, breaks
7/8 after line.

(5) Designations of Other Electrical Elements
1. Counter Wheels
(a) The coils are clearly labeled counter mgnet or Ctr. Mag.
(b) The spots or "read-outs" are numbered O, 1, «26, 9 and labeled collectively ctr. R.0.
(c) Nines and tens carry contacts are labeled with a 9 and a 10 respectively,
2. Counter Registers

Names of registers are clearly given on the diagrams. The elements belonging to specific
component counter wheels are labeled col. 1, col. 2, ..., col. 24.
410

(6)

(7)

INTRODUCTION TO THE APPENDICES

3. Fuses
Fuses are prefixed either with the letter F, or the letters MP, according as to whether
they are mounted on the functional panel or on the MP-DIV panel. Each series is numbered
consecutively from one upward. :

4, Binding Posts

Binding posts are divided into series each prefixed by VBP, SBP, FBP, BBP, VIP, ABP or SWBP.
Each series is numbered consecutively.
Cycle Designations

1. Various functional operations extend over several cycles of the calculator. The multiple
cycle operations considered here are: ;

M Multiply
D Divide ;
NR Normalizing Register

Thus a relay would be said to operate in cycle D-6 if it were energized during the 6th cycle
of the division sequence of operations. :

Miscellaneous Symbols

1, Several special designations occur in Appendix VI. The letters S and D suffixed to the
relay designations denote respectively single coil and double coil. The numbers in the col-
umn headed "Row" refer to the physical rows of relays in the MP-DIV panel.
SEQUENCE CODES

The following table lists the cascade of relays which are involved in the reading of any given sequence code, The codes are tabulated ac-
cording to the sequence colum, A, B or C, in which they are read. The first column of the table states the given code3 the second, the
functional cam which provides the impulses the third, the open points through which the impulse travels; the fourth, the normally closed
points through which the impulse travels; the fifth, the unit controlled by the sequence code. :

QUT CODES- A RELAYS

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC : Controls
1 92 | 1-1-1 8-1-1 32 92 | 3-1-1 8-1-1
Tal-1 2-1-2 Jol-1
6-1-1 6—1-1
5-1-1 ; 5el-1
4eml-1 ; 4-1-1
3eL~1 1-1-4 | Storage Counter #6- OUT
2-1-1 | Storage Counter #1- OUT ;
321 92 | 3-1-1 8-1-1
2 92 | 2-1-1 8-1-1 2-1-2 Jel-1
J-1-1 1-1-4 6~1-1
6-1-1 5-1-1
5e1-1 4el-1 | Storage Counter #7- OUT
helel
3-1-1 : 4 92 | bel-1 8-1-1
1-1-2 | Storage Counter #2- OUT ewe
-l-1
21 92 | 2-]1-1 8-1-1 5-1-1
1-1-2 F-1-1 3-1-2
6-1-1 2-1-3
pil , ; 1-1-5 | Storage Counter #8~ OUT
Awl-1
3-1-1 | Storage Counter #3- OUT Al 92 | bel-l | 8-1-1
1-1-5 7-1-1
3 92 | 3-1-1 8-1-1 6-1-1
Je-1l-1 5elel
6-1-1 3-1-2
5-1-1 2-1-3 | Storage Counter #9- OUT
Aplel
2-1-2 42 92 | h-l-1 8-1-1
1-1-3 | Storage Counter #4- OUT 2-1-3 ara
: 1-1
31 92 | 3-1-1 Beloal 5-1-1
1-1-3 7-1-1 3-1-2
6-1 1-1-6 | Storage Counter #10- OUT
5-1-1
helel |° 421 92 | b-l-1 | 8-1-1
2-1-2 | Storage Counter #5- OUT Q-L—3 Jalel
1-1-6 6-1-1

TT?

QUT CODES- A RELAYS ~contined-

GLP

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
421 5-1-1 52 hel-2
cont. 3-1-2 | Storage Counter #11- OUT cont. 3-1-3
1-1-10 | Storage Counter #18- OUT
43 92 | hel~l | 8-1-1
3x1-2 | 7-141 521 92 | 51-1 | 8-1-2
6m1-1 21-5 | 7-1-1
5-1-1 11-10 | 6-1-1
2-1-4 4n~1l-2 :
1-1-7 | Storage Counter #12- OUT 3-1-3 | Storage Counter #19- OUT
431 92 | 4-1-1 8-1-1 53 92 | 5el-1 8=1~1
3-1-2 | Jal 3u1-3 | 7-1-1
1-1-7 6-1-1 6-1-1
5-1-1 4mle2
2-1-4 | Storage Counter #13- OUT 2-1-6
1-1-11 | Storage Counter #20- OUT
432 92 | Ae-l-l 8-1-1
3-1-2 T=-1-1 531 92 | 5SelL Ba—1
2~let, 6-1-1 3=1=3 Jol-l
51-1 lelell | 6-1-1
1-1-8 | Storage Counter #14- OUT hal~2
2-1-6 | Storage Counter #21- OUT
4321. 92 | hel-l 8~1-1
3-1-2 Jolol 532 92 | 5el-1 &1-1
2-1-1, 6-1-1 31-3 Teol~1
1-1-8 5-1-1 | Storage Counter #15- OUT 2-1-6 6-1-1
h-1-2
5 92 | 5=l-1 8-1-1 ]-1~12 | Storage Counter #22~ OUT
Jo1-1
6-1-1 5321 92 | 5e1-1 Ge1-1
4nl-2 301-3 | JH1-2
3-1-3 201-6 6-1-1
201-5 le1-12 | 4-1-2 | Storage Counter #23-~ OUT
1-1-9 | Storage Counter #16- OUT
5k 92 | 5el-1 Geol -1
51 92 | 5-1-2 | 8-1-1 hel-2 | 7-1-1
1-1-9 | 7-1-1 61-1
6-1-1 Jel=l
4al-2 2-1-7
3-1-3 1-2-1 | Storage Counter #24- OUT
2-1-5 | Storage Counter #17~ OUT
541. 92 | 5el=-1 @-1-1
52 92 | 5-1-1 8-1-1 Levla2 Fel-lL
Q—1-5 | 7-1-1 1-2-1 | 6-1-1
6-1-1 3-1-l,
2-1-7 | Storage Counter #25- OUT

QUT CODES~ A RELAYS ~continued-

413

a 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
rd Oo fe) Oo oO oO co) So
h ry i i
el] a a A 8 mK & ES
8 Sb sb 3 a Se SR *
s+ 7
5 E g 5 5
fo] °° ° 5° fo} ce; oO
o o o Oo o Lo) o
a ®o o& o fy oa oO
a eo ao 8 is") i=) ag
: : é : : : :
° fo] fe) & fo] ° °
» » » » » »y pe
on n a no wm n wn
o it eda it ttt stitute 'abete tebttria |e ee ee trie
Flag qegigd gaget gaged Gage gaged gaat gate
fo) fo}
5 chy (hp nO ayy ae ae ae
§ dd ay qd addy add aid? oda
On ON et om way Ome OMAN wOoNnNrR ~O tt
N nN N N Nr N N
4 n On n Oo an an an
s 2 ma
°o g ed ml N nN
oOo ado NX N isa) toa om Pony at
oO re} Oo oO oO Bre) Bre) re}
a 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
d [e) Oo oO Oo oO [o) oO
i
3 8 s 8 g Q ra &
8 od - 3 Sh Sb sy Sb
77 Me
8 8 8 8 § 8 8
FI 5 3 5 5 3 3
i*) ° o Oo ° [o} °o
o o oO oO oO oO oO
oO oO @ 3) © oO
ag i-fe tw i) ao » a0
a o a is] oa oa ow
* & he & & im &
3 °o fo] fo} (eo) re} °o
» ~ » » rs) ~ »
on o n i?e) is) om wn
rtrt tN dodet eatoritt ei riri fo aeriec sce Aa N WN OS UN AIAN
ote ETE CECE TEES TET? idk dts Tana hy bar ir Nr Vs
2Gagdd Gott geged Good dads day daaiges gage
aorwonr OMmOMN onrwonrn worms N worm or oh. DOMINION et ao AS
S ANh ANN AN zt ANSON riN +0 In ei aun
2g. a fom | 'ege tut 1etrpa teeg TTR FT i] tt
arene aad? ddd eer Pid gags? | ray
WMWatnN INT ANe Wt WAV WN TON WIVTONN et Ne} Or
N N N
BS g & oO aR & g S
® ed
Sia q o a BS A
ao at at = —_ at wt ce
ws uN uw w wn uw el Xe}

QUT CODES- A RELAYS -continued~

TP

- Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
64 92 2-l-11 65 3—1=7
cont, 1-2-9 | Storage Counter #40- OUT cont, 2=2-1
1-3-1 | Storage Counter #48- OUT
641 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
hel-3 J-1-1 651 92 | 6—1-1 8-L-]
1-2-9 5-1-2 5-1-2 Jo1-1,
3-1-6 1-3-1 | 4-1-4
21-11 | Storage Counter #41- OUT 3a1=7
2-2-1 | Storage Counter #49- OUT
642 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
hel-3 | 7-1-1 652 92 | 6-1-1 | 81-2
2-1-11 | 5-1-2 5H3H2 | Pnda1
| 3-1-6 2=2—1. heleh
1-2-10 | Storage Counter #42- OUT 31-7
1--3-2 | Storage Counter #50- OUT
6.21 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
4n1-3 J-1-1 6521 92 | 6-1-1 Bel-1
Qelell | 5-1-2 5m -2 Fulol
j~2-10 | 3-1-6 | Storage Counter #43- OUT 2—2—). heelek
1-3-2 3-1-7 | Storage Counter #51= OUT
643 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
h-1-3 | Jel-1 653 92 | 6-1-2 | &-le1
3-1-6 | 5-2-2 Bele? | JaleL
2nl-l2 3a1-7 | Awl
1-211 | Storage Counter #44- OUT QnQm2
1-3-3 | Storage Counter #52- OUT
64,31 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1 | 7
hal=3 Jeol-1 6531 92 | 6=1-1 8-1-1
3-1-6 | 5-1-2 Bel-2 | 1-1
12-11 | 2-1-12 | Storage Counter #45- OUT 3—1-7 | belek
1-3-3 2-2-2 | Storage Counter #53- OUT
6432 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
4-1-3 Tele-1 6532 92 | beleL 8=1-1
3-1-6 | 5-1-2 5el-2 | 7H1-1
2-1-12 | 1-2-12] Storage Counter #46- OUT 3=1-7 hnl-l
202—2 1-3-4 | Storage Counter #54- OUT
64321 92 | 6-1-1 8=]-1
4n1-3 7-1-1 65321 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
3-1-6 | 5-1-2 51-2 | P-l-1
21-12 3=1=7 4-1-4
1-2-12 Storage Counter #47=- OUT QeiQu?
1+3=4 Storage Counter #55— OUT
65 92 | 6e1—1 8-1-1
Sel=2 7-1-1 654, 92 | 6=1-1 8-1-1
hele 51-2 qel-1

OUT CODES- A RELAYS -continued-

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FCG Open NC Controls
654 4el=4 3-1-8 7 6-1-2
cont. 2-2-3 cont, 5=1-3
1-3-5 | Storage Counter #56— OUT 4-1-5
3-1-9
6541 92 | 6-1-1 8=1=1 2=2-5 ;
5m1—2 Jal=-1 1-3-9 | Storage Counter #64— OUT
halk, 3-1-8
1-3-5 2~2=3 | Storage Counter #57= OUT nN 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1
1-3-9 6-1-2
6542 92 | 6—1-1 8-1-1 5-1-3
5ala2 Talel heal -5
4ml-h 3-1-8 3H1-9
2-2-3 1-3-6 | Storage Counter #58 OUT 2-2-5 | Storage Counter #65— OUT
65421 92 | 6-1-1 8=le1 72 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1
5-1-2 Fel-1 2-2-5 6-1-2
halk 3-1-8 5-1-3
2-2-3 hal 5
1-3-6 Storage Counter #59- OUT 3-1-9
1-3-10 | Storage Counter #66~ OUT
6543 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1
5-1-2 Ja1-1 721 92 | 7-1-1 Ba-l-1
hel-, 2-2=h, 2-2-5 6-1-2
3-1-8 1~3+7 | Storage Counter #60- OUT 1-3-10 | 5-1-3
4el-5
65431 92 | 6-1-1 8-1-1 3-1-9 | Storage Counter #67- OUT
5-1-2 | Jal-1
hel-y | 2-2-4 73 92 | TlH | 8-1-1
3-1-8 3-1-9 | 6-1-2
1-3-7 Storage Counter #61- OUT 5-1-3
4-1-5
65432 92 | 6-1-1 | 8-1-1 Dudu
5-1-2 7-1-1 1-3-11 | Storage Counter #68= OUT
heol-h 1-3-8
3-1-8 731 92 | Jul-l 8-1-1
2—2-h, Storage Counter #62- OUT 3~1-9 6-1-2
; 1-3-11 | 5-1-3
654321 | 92 | 6-1-1 | 8-1-2 hnl=5
5~1—2 Jm1=1 2-2-6 | Storage Counter #69= OUT
hal-4
3-1-8 732 92 | 7-1-1 | 8-1-1
2-2—4 3-1-9 | 6-1-2
1-3-8 Storage Counter #63= OUT 2-2=6 5-1-3
hel-5
7 Jol-1 8-1-1 1-3-12 | Storage Counter #70- OUT

92

STF
41

ELAYS -continued-

Bids

®
a
°o
§
g
oO
° &
B es es 5 5 5 5 5
3 2 2 roy ro) to) oy So
U I l ‘
fa
a 3 d 3 4 q a a
Sh Se Sk 3 Sr Hs Se Sb
a a aw ao a a ao po)
8 8 3 2 2 3 3 2
5 ¥ z z 2 3 3
an mn n fp) ies) nm oO
4 et 4 et oO Oo
+o] ag tetaeadl tt a | otete tot 1 | an ee ee [ an i tt i
Bl dacda MAAIAAQt aaddag datas dade Gadget gadg yg |e
oO bh4dd A bBbSAA BESAA DOAN DOANE DOTN Bose
a AO
Ss, 9OteT TD aon gag oo gege aed oo dads ged
St aes st cic oe t rot eaAanat dria adit dain
Oj; #peibti ti fret i tre Gia baa & bb be
~Ian Yd mu Pind MIAN Pwned RinNnKN minaret mNON
So N N N Nn nN nN
O| 4
BIS A x n n wa a
o —- ws ws ws LN uw wn uN
i é é é ~é é é 6
e
w 5 5
re
o t t
§ i &
s Sp sy
© 5 3
8 s 5 5 5 5 5 5
Ss ad Q QO Oo oO oO co)
J go
oO e) 1 I t t 1 |
o oO ea N Cay —t LN Ney
© © Se ais Ste 3th Se os
oo ao
a a S is} S rs} $ $s
8 8 ba 5 3x bar aa 4
pea re) = Ef > = = =
Ey ny n n n n wy a
Oo QoQ oO °o
LEED. TERETE PERET TEPER TIDE FIPVD PICP WITT
Blddan aedeey geet FEET T9GT PITT gage adds
Mvmt DHownnar AdsAAd WOMWMet WOwmnm abdd A abAvcd bh A 4
N fo} Oo Le}
BI te? TT aed rea Peed ghd TTD PATS
Bladay ga CERCA S ECAED BoMCRON ECON MECC
CANA Bt tate mata RANA hams LbdAd tbdd
o N N N nN N
BLS oS & & o & a rN
a
Sia a x a Pa g
on fvay font
o iva —t t at
Ra zz rs = = z z x

ODES~ A RELAYS -contimed-

C

Q

our

417

Qo
ea
fo}
&
o
oO
° 5 B EB B E E B
fo) oO fo) (@) oO eo) OQ
i t I ! t ¢ i
aN Oo
g 4 RS 8 ' g g
Sb ss on 3e sy Sr Se
a
5 . 5 4 4 5 g
~ a) ? a) - » »
2 J ort ot “dd ¢ ¢
B 5 3 F 5 z g
aN ri wooden ei Meader et rAN atthe ASE NN ed mR ei
8 tt TS iets tty isu PTS td tetas tees TES ( iz
ae TETEDD EEEED TEED Gee aaah alata ata
qa
giao ag Tat tr cr er te ae
Bl gage ga Fir i he A
~mMIENAN et ww Lbs reson ~onea r~ewon ™m~o nerd wo
nN N
21g g x x g x g
ols
3/8 7 os st a cA x
o wm No) Ne) OO Ne) re) ve)
6 é é i ze 6 6K 6
2
fo}
&
3 5 E i 5 5 Es g E
ro) Q o>) Oo oO [eo] Oo ro)
rn 4 L & db d D 4
a a et a a a
3 Sr Sr Ss Sth Es 3 Ey
4 5 g 5 P 5 g 4
~ ac) PCy ~ ~ » a} a)
: 3 3 Z z 2 z 3
z z E 5 z g
eat cd on |
gee daddge qqdd aq aah aged agit aad
Bidet  deit@et qigit@ aaa aaa dade adda dat
[o} ei Rr Nei NA
giapdee gag dart teed deeds geet goed weeds
Bley dete detect qth @ qd Q@ at cecal deteiaat ett
N N N N N
2 |S x x g x gt x x
@ ct ci ci nN
i?) N ei nN nN on nN oO
Oo foay ~ 7 at <7 at wt at Tt
oO ira ws wn ww ww pray wN wN
é é 6 6 ~é 6 é é

418

a
g
[=3
8
5 B 5 B 8 B B g
3 a 4 m a an E A
g = 2 #06 # 2 2
po] < Eo) a = =I a a
[2] [3 o o [3 o eo 2
5 oF F ae: ;
& & a 5 &
a d
rit ADNAN FAOMINA HANA ADM ei et a
Poe DIAN DIAN DFG WTA OANA Wa 0 at
°o a
c=J 2 rw NA rt ran ec CO IR Ww ANT Art AN CO A Nasa tin
A(d2 GAAGEE Gad GARE GAde GAaaS Gadd Gadde 44
i
H Bik & & & & & & & &
wt
z © Rs a a a N
13/32 3 ‘3 4 3 8 g 8
:| eirs & 2 i= 3s é é ~ é
mt
<i
al
al
o
alia
&
5
o
B B 8 5 5 B B 5
a 2 8a a4 & #& & &
Sh ts Se SS Se a Se g
3 3 # 8 3 $8 3
ra! al dd Pal aa
5 5 5 E 5 5 5 5
~y et toad rt Aan oe ct tN AN asthe at et
SJECMCCCMCLECCMEECO MECC CUEE. MECC CCT SME D
+a OAS ddada dAnd dhad dba SAGA ddd o Ad
qa wd
Blea GagRe AR AAAS FAG AMAR TARY ANAGE Aaa
Ad tgdde 2S ASbh LEEa LEGEH LSTA AEEad Leo
z & & & & & & & R
Siad § r 3 g q g 3&8 5
“128 8 ® eS = = e z a

QUT CODES- A RELAYS -continued—

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
76532 5-1-4 1-5-12 1 765432 3=2=h
cont. 3=2=3 cont. 1-6-3 Switch #53- OUT
23-6 Switch #46— OUT
765432 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1
765321 92 | F=l~l 8-1-1 6~1~2 1-6-4
6-1-2 4-1-8 ; 5-1-4,
5-1-4, 4-1-8
3-2-3 3=2=h,
2-3=6 2-3-8 Switch #54- OUT
1-5-12 Switch #47= OUT
7654321) 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1
7654 92 | Tal-1 8-1-1 6-1-2
ba1~2 3~2~1, 5-1~h,
Saleh 2-3-7 4-1-8
4~1-8 1-6-1 | Switch #48- OUT 3=2—1,
; 2-3-8
T6541 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1 1-6-4 Switch #55— OUT
6-1-2 3-2<h,
5-1-4, 2=3—7 8 92 | 81-1 Ja1=-2
4-1-8 ; 6-1-3
1-6-1 Switch #49- OUT 78
hela
16512 92 | Pole] Bel-1 3e2—5
6-1-2 3-2-4 2-3-9
5el-, | 1-6-2 ; 1-6-5 | Switch #56- OUT
hm lo8 ‘
2n3—7 Switch #50~ OUT él 92 | @lH1 7-1-2
1-6-5 6-1-3
765421 | 92 | 7-1-1 | 8-1-1 5m 1-5
6~1=2 3=2—h, 4wle9
Selmi, 3n2=5
4-1-8 2=3-9 | Switch #57- OUT
2-3-7
1=-6—-2 Switch #51- OUT 82 92 | Sle) 7-1-2
2—3-9 6-1-3
76543 92 | 7-1-1 8-1-1 5-1-5
6-1-2 23-8 hml~9
51h, 1-6-3 3u2=5
4-1-8 1-6-6 | Switch #58 OUT
3a2—h Switch #52= OUT
821 92 | 8-1-1 7-1-2
765431 92 | 71-1 8-1-1 2m Z—Q 6-1-3
6=1-2 203-8 1-6-6 5-1-5
5-1-4, healed
L-1-8 3-2=5 | Switch #59~ OUT

GLP
420

q
g 2 g io
a a os ° 2
si} 3 B = a 3 3
£ o eo] ho] Le) °o &
gi 8 3 3 3 3 &
RE) 4 3 & a z 2 8
S| g¢ A d ds F: F:
4, te Sb Se °
§ 3 § § A 18 38
5 5 a & E ss 8a
°o o et J et
Ea)
3 3 5 2 2 g Be 22
> P=] he & Se oe oe
[=4 [+] i @ @ @o a Q
7 E 2 : 2 2 ea ge
N [o) Qo °
ol oe Fpodd anod gated gota geetgge george Fors
ZlAag gang ceded eats gse adage aaa ay aay dae
Ad BdAAH BONN FSEAAT SONA ROtMNA BOB NON
49 dq :
r= ft acy Foes Aaa ea wet et Net aAnN SAE MN
eo aot Lae tt ae tt 4 it 16 eta 4 PS
Say ges FSR as Tira ae tg tte
1
Kel
rat N nN nN
ie g g & g gx & &
3
P lal aa = ei
qls|a8 3 $ % g a a a
q o wo wa wo wo bee) wa a
o ¢
<I 2
d °
2
8 %
S| 3
B B E
4 ° g 3
"18 5 3 z :
» iy e a
5 my a oe ° ’
3 o od f=] » ce
5 3 % a - Ss
to) 5 4 ~ 3 3
‘ ‘C, a » 2
8 ~ £ * 3 |
B B S B f 8
po o Oo q Oo 8 ©
3 3 3 F J = |
= ort
: i | et ce] tl po 4
ny pod [3] = n = a
oO [o} ej q °o
EPPEAE YHOEA aenwge aug amoorg goupd yoyo go
Rea. TATED TPETE CEPT TTI. gees tee ty
sia‘ ey ae aety te hs OK COR
Blad ayy ogee gd td qi ott
7 nN nN ON N N nN
2 ; ,
aH a
oO re N WN ai N nN
819 B 3 S g 3 z 2

YS -cont inued-

421

n
ei
~~
S 3 3
# fe fe a) 5
fo} cm ao oa
8 6 ro 3 ia
t ' om EI
Se g ~ ~
ci Pal
§ § 5 5
E E ro] rs}
rN d
5 & 8 =|
a a
An tweed team EAN
1
2/42 ANGE FAIRE ThIR
ta SAA SAAAA SAAK
g ei cd AN ANA ei AW
eye TEST TS Petateny
Set Pee? das recon
N
EB x & &
ol ae a a4
o| Ae A at ei
iy
S158 & & Py
é
2
5
a a
: 9 Bg
=] N
= ck ° °
8 A ds r 8 a 5
m3 * As ‘ & ' \
o i] & he B ei N
’ 3 2 2 3 * “K
rs
8 5S a 5 ° 8 §
2 ke] 3 3 2 ° »
S o o wo § ont
g 2 2 5 E F
8 E 5 g FA
o 5 i F ba & 5
oa Aa Ay [¥) <= :
aoedane asda avoda awdod Sadat th dad Sada te
B IPT TTT TRIESTE FVTT GOTT Todds Foss BIEIdy FF
TT TEST EERE TATED PEERS PTEEDD Gal eye aa
enaaed SALA SASHA tAtdd SASAdH SASAd SAEAK SA
2
ga | die inn AMINE AO rig and dae PrN)
i 1 ryeed 1 i nan 1 \
S| ay dato gagS ggg dogg td
N nN N N N N
a at a
Sly 3 Oo S a x pe

CoP

IN CODES. B RELAYS
Code Fo Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
1 93 | iel-l | 8-1-1 321 2-1-2 | 7-1-1
T~l-1 cont. leley | 6~1-1
6-1-1 5-1-1
ede} 4el-1 | Storage Counter #7- IN
hel-
3-1-1 h 93 | gelel | 8-1-1
2-1-1 | Storage Counter #1- IN Jel-1
6-1-1
2 93 | 2-1-1 8-1-1 5-1-1
T-1-1 3-1-2
6-1-1 2-193
pred 1-1-5 | Storage Counter #8- IN
Aele
3-1-1 41 93 | Aal-1 8-1-1
1-1-2 | Storage Counter #2- IN 1-1-5 7-1-1
6-1-1
al 93 | 2-1-1 G-l=1 5-]-1
1-1-2 | 7-1-1 3n1-2
j 6-1-1 2-1-3 | Storage Counter #9- IN
5-1-1
helel 42 93 | kel-1 | 8-1-1
3-1-1 | Storage Counter #3- IN 2-1-3 Je-l-1
6-1-1
3 93 | 3-1-1 | 8-2-1 51-1
J-1e1 31-2
6-1-1 1-1-6 | Storage Counter #10~ IN
5al~1
heole1 h21 93 | belel 8-1-1
2al=2 2-1-3 Tolel
1-1-3 | Storage Counter #4~ IN 1-1-6 6-lel
5-11
31 93 | 3-1-1 | 8-1-1 3-1-2 | Storage Counter #11- IN
1-1-3 Tolel
6-1-1 43 93 | bel-1 8-1-1
5-1-1 3-1-2 Joleol
4-1-1 6-l-1
2-1-2 | Storage Counter #5~- IN Sel=1
Qmloh
32 93 | 3-1-1 | 8-1-1 1-1-7 | Storage Counter #12- IN
2-1-2 J-1-1
6-1-1 431 93 | kewl S-le1
5-1-1 3-12 7-1-1
4-1-1 1-l«7 6=1=1
1-1-4 | Storage Counter #6- IN 5-1-1
2-4, | Storage Counter #13- IN
321 93 | 3-1-1 8-1-1

IN CODES- B RELAYS ~contimued-

4
| zi z 4 A 5 5 z A
7) 1 t t t nS J i 3
é
= qi yy ag a a a Q nN
8 Sh Se Sy 3p sy Se te Sr
he
8 & 8 § 8 8 8 g
§ g g z 5 g
i=) So ko} ° ° to} °o fo]
o o oO o oO o o o
@o © oO @ oO o oO @o
1) rr) 00 i-*) a0 v1) %6 a0
5 ° 3 3 3 : 3 g
8 8 8 § & s 8 8
n n a on is) a na wo
t i t da ‘ eet and t
SRKKKCMREELEM CCC MPEE ESCM EEOC REELS See L aE E EDT)
nN
gland a anon 4 Ann dan AREQ aot
eo ' to etre te
Aiqia aaa AR a a? ott ftstd iad
218 R g R g R R g
3 qt
° et iq'g q tony
5] & a Q t 2 # z 2
5 A A Ai z re z z
he 1 r] 1 t t J
wy 6
# + Bs $ t % a g
& Cs Sb Se Sr St Sy 3
5 P 8 i i P ‘
g § 5 g g g g
3° °° o ° ° ° 9°
© o oO oOo o o o
o @ cy @D @ @ oO
oo ao a0 1") ao x ag
(] C3) a C) a rs)
ba u & u h he &
8 8 8 8 8 8 8
” on n n a an wn
oO ci
andre Aadeadc ett in Oo arict Nn La) eteiei Art Foe | rin rt
2 EEE TET PETIT TEETER TITERS TERED Tay
CCU Pare Gaia gagadd qaqa qatada dadiaad
t 1 J
Blige odddt Ff reo rb COTE
21 R R R Q R R R
$ a
Bla g 7 x al
sy zt nw aw wn ww Q

424

YS =continued—

=
4 z Bi z 2 5 z Fs zi
fa t ! 1 i 5
$ 3 g a g 4 4 %
8 Sb Sb 4 3 Ste = ES Se
: be
8 8 8 8 § 8 § 3
g g i 5 g
° So o °o oO °o ce] ce)
oOo o Oo oO Oo o Oo o
2 g 2, 2 2, g e g
3 a 3 3 3 a 2 3
Sa i $4 hy h & fi &
8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
n n n n a no a <a)
Oo tb ba bag tte tte tot a ar) t aie 1 .f € é oud
Bi Ana dba dda aed qed caida delta @ deta.
dada datbed dthtd SLA dAhddda ddAAA BAAAA DEAN
oO
: CO ROR ICR ECR) qeq ett Te
é age) ado tga od qee gate
i= R R gS g BN g§ RB
3 2 i et
Blak -& & & 4 4 1 y
Oo oO ‘Oo oO ite} ~o oO ve} oO
3 A Zi Z 5 z z z
1 1
= g 3 rl g a 3 ae
8 se te LS SS Se LE ~ Sth
8 8 8 8 $ 8
5 g 5 g 5 5
3 o ° Ke) ° (°] co}
o © o o o o oO
o @ a @ oe eo oOo
a bt) ioe) wo a i=")
3 ag g a a a a
hy & he 7 i) *] ta
oO fo) fo] ° fe} ° So
Py P) » 2 2 > 2
wi vi wa a a a a
aad? eteadei add BAN OMWOwn AAN AW OH ar N NN ade CAN ari
faa t ud ie t t
ejaade Goad Aaa AGREES added padded dae
a 1 i ot
B)adag Gadd Faded 4 at ta Ce
Pig oR R R R R g R
2 ot
Sia x & 7
oOo 7 —_T ei Nn N
ww w & ey <O so om NA

RELAYS ~continued-

JIN CODES- B

[>] =a =a = i]
3 % Zi z z z z Z z
H i]
& 4 d 4 i. 3 i m db
r=] ww wn an vay iN [ray aw uN
& Se Sr t Sr  ~ Sth sy
& fi
8 8 5 8 8 5 8 8
: E E 5 E : : E
fo} fe} c*} ce] {o} Fs co} fo}
© o o oOo Oo © Oo o
oO @® oO @ oO oa o C)
Ee) ot) 0 a0 is) a0 i) bp
8 8 g 3 2 5 S 3
§ 8 8 8 8 8 8 §
Q ” na on n mn wn no
ai stan de RN ae at care de anm anwas ad ad?
eae 1 I tt 1 ou
e/AAAGS A Aaag GSe | PENGS Saad Goad a
an bdl MOHrAITN Ora oot OMrAN el woenn orn orn
c a | AAO aN NN ANt =t AN AN wn MAN at AN ay
@ ran i) tiuve ha aie ETS F Sa rae er var tuto TE TEP
Bl dtd detec ete Arid @eN ate gleieden chet tet Vay
OUNMY WINNS WMNAN DINAN 4d oO Wat oO Wate ASA WOMEN
Ble R Rg g Rg BN R R
C) et
Bla a a & a d s q
Qo rT ay ws wn iva ws uw ws Lay
Ne} Ne} ret ~~ ~o ~o ve} Re)
4 zi % z A 2 z zi z
t i t t 1
: + 4 8 S $ & g a
8 Be: 4 Sh se sy Se * 3 Sr
i) he
8 6 8 8 8 8 8 8
5 E 5 5 : 5 5 :
co] ° is] °o (o] So ° °
Le) Oo o o oO Oo Oo o
g g 2 ° ° © g 2,
g £ g g Z g z
co} fo} ° °o o ° fe} ce}
ae) Pp ~ ~ » » ~ ~
mn n wn n nun wn ay nm
g [ee tenet babe eed pee fa t t75 i teireud 1 rae ie)
Adee a Ad Meade dete aided elgg cateiaien natal a
eldae aapd aavd gopia gq det Ft TE
Blige iat qhitqtet qtatgtalg gta dip ig rien
BIR R R R g g R R
o
oO om Coat fay oO et fey
oO tt 7 Tt = ms nN ws ay
Xe) ~O Ne] Ne} so ie) Ne) ve}

426

ti] P—4
3 Fi F 5 5 z z
Hy
bog 2 ¢ ¢@ ‘
& St Es Rs Se Se &
, he
§ 8 § e 2
E : 5 E E 5
oO 3 co] °o oO o
o o o oO oO Oo
@o @ @® ti)
Z : Z : g :
8 8 8 8 8 8 e
a n mn n wo n ica)
qj NX o oO
AIDS FITNLT TINT BIeged aven troled geeky aq
Bldg aaah daadd Adah aad cad edad de
DOWSAN DOWN DWOKWTA = BOWS DOANATH DWOKnMAN WO
gute | ot tea FF qT TR det Tt
Bato ay CCE SECC MC cit od
ta eae | en ~nAre tA Kanne wat ~ste ~t
i
ag
3/2] s f g ES ES ES ES 8
S
2
° @
oO 3s
ri8ia Fy PS a e q 5
n i R is i é = i é
Pp
:
oft
|
al
SI
o
=
Alls Bi 5 F 5 F Bi 5
7 1 t I i i
+ et nN Lsay ik
g 3 ~o ie} are)
5 S g S g $ $ 8
: E 5 E 5 E E
°o °o (+)
@ oO ty a @o o oO
tt) oo 00
3 o s e s Pd >
o
Aaatnt ard Cs | ac FAN MADRAS ran now
gi aura raced 177 na tree eet TERT TERETE
dave gag ge SICTETS TERETE Gotta
g am AN ~- AN az ri w ei et ON wn
© t TT? t i7 t 4
ELUMERTCEEMCCCECMET EST RUE opt ad
SAA SASA4 SALAd SALAH o£ an) nc
21S R R R R EN g
cj
z32 8 5 =
oO ire) we) ve) i i iM

IN CODES- B RELAYS ~contimued-

— ace 6S

i
IND

Ey
i
x“
a
o a
3 st g Q 4
: gs § 8 fi
8 4 3 3 &
é B E §
he be
ri 3 2 2 2 £
A Co S S G f= 4
@ Sy » > > A
i=} (7) o o o >
© © ® © © 3 [=]
2 S ea a at ot
B a} orl @ © ®o 4 i
n ie] n a Pa
N ret NY ARON YN MN thd a th Nate nN N tyal
e[ dead (aaah Aad Agee Ade a A ang
DWAMN ava aAS4 db Add DAN wmNert ch aNer
SEAWAN MWe TANTO ON COIN TO eH OORT O EM ONT OE Nm Nt 00
R)RRGS Rg GAGS ATA PG Pade AS TS
nbd lk bibcd tb aAd AAS rwomnte MoOomatn og ASA A KeoOowMmwstm
BLO o a a a EN ae a
: ae
oie a -t q y 3 3
$13 o So Oo SO Oo so oO
° rd isd ~ is ~ ~ isa is
ys 8
3 2
z 6
a a
4 $ 3
£l 2 FS a a
a) 7 206 3
S| a & 5 5 A
a 4B i Ui
hi I End N d,
@ ® > 3
5 z 8 3 3 g
8 8 a ba 8 . a 3
2 > 5 5 a nol rd |
s (2) + ae
<a ol 5 5 =i 2 A a0
Ay a & a | 4
on ot ANY agen Aged EP ah ie harry ON bhoid N Mmrtn
epee Ae aaa GAG paadd aaagds adage dbigd
AA dbS4A astdn d$4A dShd4 SASAdA BALAA SALAS
Bad qaadd dad ada Ga Aah Bae
AN TAN ™m™ AN Ad rhak oh ho ob ON
2 & & R R eS & &
© * a
SINE & x a aN dt x
°;#8 8 & & c e x 8

JIN RELAYS- B RELAYS -- continued-

82P

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
765431 95 | 7-1-3 8-1-2 87h 93 | 8-1-1 6-1-4
6-1-5 2-3-8 W fat ad 5-1-7
5-1-1, heel 3-3-2
4-1-8 2-5=3
3=2=1, 1-9-5 | SIO- IN #1 (direct)
1-6-3 Print Counter #2— Half Pickup ;
8741 93 | 8-1-1 6~1-4
8321 93 | a1l-1 Jo1-2 Jodo 2 5-1-7
3a 2=5 6-1-3 hetml 3-3-2
2~3-10 | 5-1-5 1-9-5 2-5-3 | SIO IN #2 (plugged)
1-6-8 4-1-9 | Normalizing Register- IN
853 93 | 8-1-1 Jan1=2
5e1=5 6-1-3
3-2-7 | 4-1-10
2Q=h-2 | MIO Counter-- IN
1-7-3 | 3uss Cols.13-24 to MIO Cols.13-24
8531 93 | 8-1-1 Jol-2
5n1=5 6-1-3
3a 2—7 4-1~10 | MIO Counter~ IN
1+7=3 2eh-2 |} Buss Cols.1-12 to MIO Cols.13-24
87 93 | 8-l-1 6-1-4,
Tola2 5-1-7
kn-2-1
3-3-1
2-5-1
1+9~1 | Storage Counter #64- Special IN
871 93 | 8-1-1 6-1-4,
Jaolo2 5=1-7
1-9-1 4-2-1
3=3—1
2-5-1 | Storage Counter #65- Special IN
873 93 | 8-1-1 6-1-d,
Jola2 5-1-7
3~3~1 he2al
205=2
1~9-3 | Storage Counter #68- Special IN
873]. 93 | 8-l-1 6-1-4
7-1-2 5-1-7
3-3-1 e2-1
1-9-3 2-5~2 | Storage Counter #69- Special IN

MISCELLANEOUS CODES- C RELAYS

Code FC Open NC Controls Code FC Open NC Controls
1 9% | 1-1-1 6-1-1 51 9h | 5-1-1 6-1-1
5-1-1 1-1-9 4-1-2
4-1-1 3-1-3
3-1-1 | Storage Counter- Read-Out 2-1-5 | Initiate and Complete Punching
2-1-1 | Negative Absolute Value
53 9h | Sal=2 6-1-1
2 94 | 2-1-1 | 6-1-1 3-1-3 | 4-1-2
5-1-1 2-1-6
“kel-1 1-1-11 | Interpolator #1- Step Ahead
3-1-1 | Storage Counter= Read—Out
1-1-2 | Positive Absolute Value 531 94 | 5-1-1 | 6-1-1
3-1-3 ho1l-2
21 Oh | 2-1-1 6-1-1 l-l-11 | 2-1-6 | Interpolator #2- Step Ahead
1-1-2 5-1-1
4-1-1 532 9h | 5-1-1 6~1-1.
3-1-1 | Switch- Invert 3-1-3 | hw -2
2-1-6 1-1-12 | Interpolator #3- Step Ahead
3 9 | 3-1-1 6-1-1
5a1-1 5k 9h | 5-1-1 6-1-1
4-1-1 haLa2 3~1-4,
201-2 2-1-7
1-1-3 | Intermediate Counter- Reset 1-2-1 | Interpolator #l- Step Back
31 9h | 3elel 6-1-1 541 9h | 5-1-1 6-1-1
1-1-3 Sala h-1l-2 3-1-1,
helel 1-2-1 | 2-1-7 | Interpolator #2- Step Back
2-1-2 | EIO- Reset
5h2 9, | 5-1-1 | 6-1-1
32 94 | 3=1-1 6~1-1 4-1-2 3elHk
2-1-2 5el-1 2-1-7 1-2-2 | Interpolator #3- Step Back
Anl-1
1-1-4 | Storage Counter and Switch- Invert 6 96 | 6-1-2 5a1=2
4-1-3
321 9h | 3-1-1 6-1-1 3-1-5
2-1-2 5-1-1 2-1-9
1-1-4, hel~1l | SIO=- Reset 1-2-5 | Print and Complete Printing
432 9h | kml=1 6=1—1 61 96 | 6-1-2 5-1-2
3-1-2 51-1 | Read-Out Under Control of 1-2-5 4-1-3
2-1-4, 1-1-8 | Counter #70 3-1-5 | Interpolation- Drop out
2-1-9 | Tape Selection Relays
5 94 | 5-l-1 6-1-1
h=1=2 62 96-| 6=1-2 5-1-2
3-1-3 2a1-9 4e1-3
2=1-5 3-1-5 | Pick up Interpolation-
1-1-9 | Initiate Punching 12-6 | Sequence Control Relay

jis

eo

oer

MISCELLANEOUS CODES~ ¢ RELAYS -contirued-
Code FO Open NC Controls Code Fe Open Controls
63° 96 | b-1l]e2 | 5-1-2 87 106 | s-1-1
3~1-5 ho-l=3 Ja1-2 Stop- with Stop Key
2-1~10
1-2-7. | LIO=- Reset
¥
632 96 | 6~1-2 5-1-2
3=1-5 4-1-3
2-1-10 | 1-2-8 | Card Feed #l- OUT
6321 9% | 6-1-2 5-1-2
3-1-5 h-1-3
2=1~10
1-2-8 Card Feed #2- OUT
6h 96 | 6-1-2 | 5-1-2
4-1-3 3-1-6
2—1=11
1-2-9 | Automatic Check
641 96 | 6-1~2 5-1-2
4-1-3 3~1-6-
1-2-9 21-11 | Interpolator— Position
643 96 | 6-1-2 | 5-1-2
hele3 2-1~12
341-6 1-2-11 | Division- Place Limitation
6431 96 | 6-1-2 | 5-1-2
4-1-3 21-12
4mlab
1=2-11 Division=- Place Limitation
64,32 96 | 6-1-2 5-1-2
hel-3 1-2-12
3e1-6 |
2-1=12 Division- Place Limitation
64,321 96 | 6-1-2 5-1-2
4-1-3
3-1-6
2~1~12
1=2-12 Division~ Place Limitation
7 107 | 7-1-1 Repeat
106 | 7-1-3 Stop- with Emergency Switch and

Stop Key

SEQUENCING - START, STOP, REPEAT

The start key is depressed and the start relay energized. Through the start relay, the read control relay,. the start interlock relay and
the clutch magnet are energized. The sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (a, B, 7). The corresponding sequence relays including
C-7 and thus the repeat relay are picked up. The pick up of the start interlock relay will open the circuit through the start key to the
start relay, preventing the flow of current to the start relay in the event that the start key is held dom. If the repeat relay is ener-
gized, the start relay will pick up. If the emergency switch is on and the stop key depressed, the energized sequence relay (C~-7 will
permit the stop control relay to pick up. The pick up of stop control opens the circuit to the read control relay and the clutch magnet.
The stop control relay may also be picked up through the stop key and points of sequence relays C-8 and C-7,

Magnet 9 Cycle 0 9 Cyele 1 9

Seq-33-1 Start

Seq~31-1 Read Control

Clutch Magnet

Seq-28-] Start Interlock

Seq-C-7-1

Seq-27-1 Repeat

Seq-32-1 Stop Control 5 OS

eq-3 op Contro LTT Try
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
Start Key or Seq-33~1-(4) FC~108 (6-2 1/2)] +[Start Key dSeq-27-1-1
Seq-27-1-1 Start VBP~278 =
VBP-276 Seq-33-1-4, l —]_FC=103 (6-5 1/3) Seqg-27-1-2
FC-103 (6-5 1/3) VBP=276 f-] ~ ry - F-18
VBP~277 VBP=277 Seq-28-I-1 Star
Seq-27-1-~2 FC-108 (6-2 1/2) Seq-33-1-(4)
Seq-28-1-1 NC =| ~ poeg-33<1-4
VBP=278 ry
FC-105 (4-2 1/2) |Seq-31-1-(4) +-FG=}9 5 (hw2 1/2)
Sequence Cut-off {Read Control / o-—o82a233-1-1 Clutch
Switch P and Clutch . Seq.Sw. C.F.#1 Sw. C.F.#2 Sw. BBP-64 s : Magnet
Card Feed #1 Sw.] Magnet . Q = F-19
Card Feed #2 Sw.
BBP=64,
Seq-33-1-1 ~ F-18
Seq-32-1-1,2 NC Read Control
Seq-31-1-(4)
Seq-27-l-1 or Seq-28-1-(4) Seq-27-1-1 or +, Seq~27-1-1
Start Key =‘ [Start Interlock [Start Key 4 FC=104 (32 1/2)
Later /2) aed Ga Seq-33-1-3
FC=104 (3-2 1/2 eqn28~ VBP=279 - F-18
VBP=279 WL -Stare Interlock
Seq=33~l1e3 Seq-28~1-(4,)
Start Key
fom Seq~2b—l-4,
VBP=276 eg

I&P

SEQUENCIN: ~ START, STOP, REPEAT -continued-

Ger

‘Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Cireuit Circuit Diagram
FC-101 (3-2 1/3) FC=102 (4=9 3/4)] + FO-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP=1LO0 VBP=225 =i eq-31-1
Seq-31-1,2,3,4 |C-7-1-(4) C-7=1-1, VBP=.
Reading Pins Seq-31-2 8
C-7 = F-
Seq-31-3} 4 *° Least)
C-7-1-h
Seq~31-h} a ae
|FO-102 (4-9 3/4) t_|
EpOs23
FC-107 (0-5 1/4) |Seq-27-1-(4) FC=107 (O-5 1/h) | +.FO=-107 (0-5 1/4)
V¥BP-280 Repeat VBP-280 C+Jal-1
C-J~1-1 Seq-27-1-4 apCzad ry an Fei
seq" Talk peat
t Seqe27-1-(4)
Stop Key Seq-32-1-(4) Stop Key + Stop Key
VBP-281 Stop Control VBP=281 = FC-106 (12-13 1/3)
FC~106 Seq-32-1-, (ePE281 J 7 _ Cx JoLe
(12-13 1/3) VeP=282.~C*«S WA - F-18
VBP-282 Emer .Sw. Stop Control
C-7-1-3 Seq-32-1-4 Seq-32~1-(i)
Emergency Sw. 4
FC~101 (3-2 1/3) FC~102 (4-9 3/4) | + FC-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP-100 VBP-225 ___ psege31-1
Seq-31+1,2,3,4 CrB-3n(h} C-8-1-4 *VBPCLOO ces - F-18
Reading Pins CH 7a l=(4 C-7~1=k Seq-31-2 qecdal-k C~8=1-(4)
eq=31-3
t Co?
Seq-3i-u] 9 *° (G=F=1-h C~7=1-(4)
¢ tJ
|FC-102 (4-9 3/h)
Varca2s
Stop Key Seq-32-1-(4) Stop Key + Stop Key
VBP=261 Stop Control VEP-281 = ~ FC-106 (12-13 1/3)
Foo106 1/3) Seq-32-1—4 VBPF281 EI oe &rT-1-2 tel
“13 1/2 VBP=282 C-8-1-1
VBP--282 t_o— - F-18
C—7--1-2 oeg-32-1-4 Stop Control
C~8--1-1 L_ Seq-32-1-(4.)

SEQUENCING - AUTOMATICS

As mentioned on page 15, the code Miscellaneous 7 which controls the repeat relay may be replaced by certain automatic continue operation
codes, The circuits controlled by these automatic codes are presented in the following table, except for the circuit operated by the check
code, Miscellaneous 64, which is included in the automatic check counter circuits. Each of these circuits may replace the circuit through
the start relay to pick up the read control relay and the clutch magnet. For all automatic codes, the cam contact FC-105 provides the im-
pulse which travels through the card feed control circuits, as shown in the card feed circuit, to BBP-64. The alternate circuits employed
by the automatic codes of the different components of the machine are shown between BBP-64 and FBP-98. All of the circuits are completed
from FBP-98 to the read control relay and the clutch magnet as shown in the last diagram of this group.

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram

BBP-64, MULTIPLY-DIVIDE UNIT
12=1,2=3

or + 3

BBP=110 BBPT64 t__.

Ah-5-1 =2~3
4

BBP#}111
FBP-133
216-1-2 NC
and
55-3-2 NC
T8=2=8 NC
81-2=9 NC —5aL

BBP=52 BBP-110 4 O FBP=133 o2l6—1-2
FBP-99 BBP=l1]

201-1-2 NC
FBP=98

INTERPOLATION UNIT

79-1-7 Be, OE of8-1-7
48-1-7
BBP=54

or

BBP=110 and
165-1-8
290=1-2 NC or
162-1-7
130-1-2 NC
176-1-2 NC or
25h=3—1
255=3-1
256~1-2
257-1-2

and

FBP=98

&cF
SEQUENCE = AUTOHATIC -continued=

€P

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

BBP=61,

liW1-5
31,-3-8(not used)
BEP=54,

or

BBP=110

FBP-135

207-1-1.

and

FBP-98

BBP-6h,
12=1,2+3

or

BBP=110
Lhnw5a=1
BBP-111.
FBP-133
216-12 NC

or
FBP=135
266-3=.
217~3=1
216-1~3
and
55-3=2 NC
78=2-8 NC

L0G UNIT
1]-1-5
t,o dh38
t nf”). ~
(not used) BBP=54 FEF+9
eo7a-1=1

EXPONENTIAL UNIT

+ A2m1-3
BEPF6L, t_,
12-2=3

ae Fon

Ba2-8
of t____,81-2-9
ft FBP=99 201-12
BBP=52 a”

FBP+98

2l6-jx2_|_,22521-3

Ibyen5mD on | BBP

BEPPLIO® 4___._. FBPs133._T fercia1 ©
1

SEQUENCING - AUTOMATICS ~continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

BBP-6h,
81-3-1 NC
230-3-3
FBP=98

BBP-64,
BBP~110
FBP-135
113~3-2
112-1-3
103=3-1
102=3-12
143-32
142-1-3
133-3-1
132=3-12
100-1~2
FBP-98

BBP=64

BBP-110

FBP=135

246=3-2

24,8—1-11

or

Card Indicator=
1,2 NC

24 5—3—2 ‘

and

FBP-98

SINE UNIT

100-1-2
PUNCH
+ BBP=110 2h6-3-2
BBP= 4 of 48-1-11
t__.___

Card Indicator-1

Card Indicator-2

Ser
SEQUENCING - AUTOMATICS -continued~

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-105 (4-2 1/2) GARD PEED
Sequence Cut-off
Switch “10% (4-2 1/2)
Seqn25-1-1,2 a foun -25~1-1
Seq-26~1-1,2 Seq.Sw. Seg-26-1-1
Card Feed #1 Sw, 25-12 tp 8
Card Feed #2 Sw. t_. Seg-26-1-2 BBP=64,
BBP-64, t
_/— A
C.F.41 Sw. C.Foi#2 Sw.
(Completion of Preceding Circuits)
FBP-98 Seq-31-1-(4) + Seq-32-1-1
Seq-32-1-1. NC Read Control FBPOOS * | Read Control
Seq-32-1-2 NC jand |Seq-32-1-2 Seqn31-1-(4)
Clutch Magnet Qa SF F-18
Q——m F-19

Ciutch Magnet

9eP

SWITCHES

CYCLE 0. Assuming it is desired to read out of switch 8, code 75, into storage counter 5, code 31, the sequence mechanism reads the line
of coding (75, 31, blank). The sequence relays are picked up. The switch 8 out and storage counter 5 in relays are energized. If the code
32 is used in the Miscellaneous column, the storage counter invert relay is picked up. If the code 21 is used in the Miscellaneous column,
the switch invert relay and the IVS invert relay are picked up. If the code 8431 in the Out column is read, the independent variable
switch (IVS) out relays are energized,

CYCLE 1. The storage counter magnets are energized, The carry circuits, which are presented under storage counters, are closed and the
carry impulse completes the entry,

Magnet 9 Cycle 0 9 Cycle 1 9
Seq-A-7=1 J
Seq-A-5-1 J
Seq-B-3-1,2,3 ]
Seq-B-l+1,..,11 J
SC5-4,5,6 Str Ctr In
Sw8-1,2,3 Switch Out
Str Ctr Magnets oeeneen
Seq-C-2-1,..,6
Seq-C-1l-1,..,11 J
Switch Invert
Seq~A~8=1. ]
Seq-Aq-hno1,2 J
SeqnA~3-1,2,3 ]
Seq-A-l-1,..,11 }
Seq-30-1,2,3 IVS Out
Seq-29-1 IVS Invert
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-101 (3-2 1/3) FC-102 (4-9 3/4)| + FC-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP-100 VBP=225 Sequ3l-1
Seqr31-1,2,3,4 | A-7=1-(4) An7ol-h, VBP=100 ¢
Reading Pins | A~5-1-(12) An5el-11 bd Loe?
Bu3—1,2,3=(12) | B-3-3-11 -31-2 A-7-1-1, A~7=1-(4)
Bel-1,..,11=(12)} B-1-11-11 aa
31-3 A-5 -, F=16
7 Ok Pe SS A25-1-(12)
31-4
4] B=3
§ Oo p3-3-11 Ba3-1,2,3-(12)
td
-1 > F-17
[FC+102 (4-9 3/4) 4-2 B-1-11—11 Bel~1,..,11-(12)
WEPOns5 *

LEV

——
SWITCHES =continued-

8eP

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-92 Sw8=1,2-(12) |sc-11 (12-0) + FO-92 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |Sw8-3-(4) SBP-1-2 7) ei -8~]-1
VBP-150 |SwBP-3-28 WEPCI50~ t giaT=1-1
AeB=l-1 NC Swo—3—1, 6-2
A-To1-1 OE feta] 3
AnG=1-2 NC ry Switch Out
A-5-1=3
Ae-h-2-6 NC
Aw3-1-11 NC mal 5
An2—2-9 NC
Aq1-4-5 NC [sc-11. (12~0) ~J
SwBP=2=8 HA O 5 Ba 3—1, { o ahs = Falh
SBP=l1-2 SwBP=3=28 t SwBP=2-8 J Swo~1,2-( 123)
Sw8=3—(4)
SCL, 059 Str Counter + SCaL 059
Str Ctr Reset NC} Magnets . Md
Str Counter t ‘
Invert N Str Ctr . Pe : s
SBP=3-1 yee y? j Reset Str Ctr SBP-3- SwBP-1-
SwBP~LH1,. +59 ' Invert 1,66,9  tsee,9 Switch SwEP=l-
Switch Invert NC : Invert 11,.. 320
SwBP-1~11, .. »20 09192937 49 5°79 BP9"
Switch RO Sw RO B12
SwS-1,2 Sw Out ' 1.
Buss i
SC5H4,5 [ 5 SC5 <b 55 F-14
Str Ctr Ina Buss ~ ~_ =
Str Counter
Magnets
FC-101 (3-2 1/3) [FC~L02 (4-9 3/4) | + FO-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP=100 WBP.-225 0 $eg-31-1
Seqe31-1,2,3,4  [C-2-1,..,5-(12) |C-2-6-6 VBP-100 t_.
Reading Pins Cm 2—6—(6 (<0 822
Cm1-1,.+,l1-(12) ~1-11-11 {Seq-31-2 CH2—1, 00 5-(12)
ri Cu2—646 Cu2~6-(65
t.._|
Seq-31-3 C-1 =~ F-18
re) 9 C<i-t,..,11-(12)
1-11-11
$eq-31-4 te
|
C102 (4-9 3/h)

Wpca2s

SWITCHES -continued—

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

SC+1, 2659

Str Ctr Reset NC
Str Counter
Invert NC
SBP=3—1,.+,9 and
SBP-6-10
SwBP~1-1,..59
Switch Invert NC
SwBP=1=11, ..,20

Switch Common
and RO

+ SC-1 Str Ctr Reset
|SC—2
-_ 7
Sc-3
7
SC=4,
+
SC—5

SC-8

SC=9

Str Ctr Invert Switch Invert Reo.
Midgs.
~~ SBP
3 4 SwBP
O08 Igy 2
Jel o*
co
32 FT
Ore FE 1513 2)
a 7 Ye
3=
a 13 3
oS —
t. 3xh,
] aaa 1k |
o—¥ 35 i
oe tT lag gi
oo
t 3=6
“OTe Fr 1g 6
a | 327
| ert lat J
an rs
© ae ——_—_
— O18 T. 13g g
1-19 9
rn 6210 & T O—> &4

SWITCHES «continued-

Orr

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

FC=94,
(2 2-33 2/3)

Qebc1d NC
C-5-1-1 NC
C-hel-1 NC
C-3-1-1 NC
C=2=l=1
C-1-1-2
SBP=1~9
SwBP.-3-26

FC=-92

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
VBP-150
A=8—L=1
A=T—L-2 NC
A=6—1—3 NC
A-5ele5 NC
A-h=l=9
AmZJai2nb
Aw2—3e12 NO
AwL=S—11

FCm1, 059
Pmi267 y 009275

Seq-i29—1 N°

TVS RO

Seq~30-1,2

Buss

SC5=i.,5

FC=94,

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
VBP-148
C~6-1-1 NC
C~5=1-1 NC
(C~4e1-1 NC
C~3-1-1 NC
o~2=1-1
c~1-1-2

Switch Invert

Seq-30-1,2-(12)
Seq-30-3-(4)
IVS-OUT

Str Counter
Magnets

Seq-29-1-(12)
IVS Invert

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP=l-2
SwBP+3=28

Sw Invert-11

FC-97 (12-0)
VBP-173
Seq~30~-3—4,

FC-97 (12-0)
VEP-173
Seq-29-1-12

(12 1/2-13 2?)

VBP. a

+E

|sc-11 (12-0)
EL

SBPCI-2° SwBFC3-28 ° 4

cow_Invert-11

aa * on ja L-1
i erhnl~1
Ee kad Co
t £-2-1-1

t_C-1-1-2 Sw Invert-(12)

+ FC-92 (12 12-13 Y?)

(12-0)

VBP=173

+ FC-1,.6,9 Seq-2

09275
gees aie

Ivs

_ seg=29~-1-12
VaPe 173 t

Orso A=Taol=2
re

Seac30-3-4

t
SBP-1-9 _SwBPC3=-2a |
LL

SeBECI—30 SBPSB-9 FOL,

9 Seq~30-1, im
geer Sequ30-3-(4
Ande 26 “a TaS0Ur

A~2=-3—12
f ficd-6-11

tess

jel,

FSPO33;..,49 VBPS267” Tt

ene

mh» 5
- Fly
Str Counter oonee

IVS Invert
2m LoL

*___C-1-1-2

+ tearn)?*

STORAGE COUNTERS

CYCLE O. Assuming that is is desired to read out of storage counter 3, code 21, into storage counter 1, code 1, the sequence mechanism
reads the line of coding (21, 1, blank), The sequence relays are picked up. The storage counter 3 out and storage counter 1 in relays are
energized. If the code 1 in the Miscellaneous column is read, an additional circuit is closed, if a O stands in the 2th column of counter
3, picking up the storage counter invert relay and thus causing the negative absolute value to be read out, If the code 2 in the Miscella-
neous column is read, an additional circuit is closed, if a 9 stands in the 24th colum of counter 3, picking up the storage counter invert
relay and thus causing the positive absolute value to be read out. Assuming that it is desired to reset counter 1, the sequence mechanism
reads the line of coding (1, 1, blank). The storage counter 1 out and in relays and the storage counter reset relays are picked up. The
energizing of the storage counter reset relay opens the circuit to the carry control relay,

CYCLE 1.. The storage counter magnets are energized. The storage counter carry control, carry and 24th column carry relays are picked up.
The carry impulse completes the storage counter entry.

Magnet 9 Cycle O 9 Cycle 1 9

Seq-A-2-1,..,6 ]
Seq-A-1-1,..,11 J
Seq-Bel-1,..,11 |
8C3-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
SCl~4,5,6 Storage Counter In
Storage Counter Magnets a Pr
SC1-9 Storage Counter Carry Control

SCl-7,8 Storage Counter Carry
SC1-10,11 24th Column Carry
SC3~10,11 24th Column Carry
Storage Counter Invert Lt
Str Ctr Invert (= Absolute Value)
Str Ctr Invert (+ Absolute Value)
Storage Counter Reset ;

oP

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit |. Circuit Diagram
FC+101 (3-2 1/3) FC-102 (4-9 3/4) | + FC-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP=100 An2e1ye0,5-(12) |VBP=225 Seq-31-1
Seq-31-1,2,3,4 |A-2-6-(6$ An2-606 VBPSIOO | 4
Reading Pins ap 2) Am1-11-11 p <ofht2 ~ 22)
Bel-1,..,11-(12) |B-1-1-21 Seq-31-4 fs2=6-6 Aw2a1, 04 5-(12
“ ry Ae2u6-(65
Seq~31-3
t A-l - F-16
q+? tam peep lin(12)
é8eq-31-4
41
B-1 ~ F-17
- 1-11-11 -I-1,..,11-(12)
|FC-102 (4-9 3/4) td
WePCaa8

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

FC-92

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
VBP~150
A-8=1-1 NC
A-7-1-1 NC
A-6-1-1 NC
A-5=1-1 NC
Amhe-l-1 NC
A-3=-1-1 NC
An-2-1-1
A-1-1-2
SBP=10=3

FC~93

(12 1/2-13
VBP-149
BeBeL-1
BeJal~1
Beé=1-1
Be5-1-1
Behel~1
Ba3=1-1
Be2=1-1
Bel-1-1
SBP-8-1

2/3)

SSSSSS4

SC-1, 4259

Str Ctr Reset NC

Str Counter
Invert NC

SBP Rows 34.057

Str Ctr RO

5C3-1,2 Str Ctr
Out

Buss

5C1-4,5 Str Ctr
In

Storage Ctr Out
$C3=-1,2-(12)
$C3-3-(1,)

Storage Ctr In
SC1-4, 5-(12)
SC1-6-(4)

Storage Ctr
Magnets

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP-1-2
SC3~3—h,

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP.-1-2
SC1-6-4

+ F0=92 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
A-Bel=1
VEP=1 | ee eye
Anba]-1
phe Sahel
t Am=l=1 Str Ctr Out
Ae3-1-1
An2=1=1
t_pAci-1-2
(12-0) ~_
5 (SC03=3~4, - F-ly
SBPSI—2 ¢ SBPCIO-3 _T ~1;2-T12)
SC3=3=(4)
+ FC (12 1/2-13 2/3)
Bu8-1=1
IBPCILS°? Fs BHY=1-1
-1-1
_B-5=l-1
B-h~l<1 Str Ctr In
Be3~1-1
B-2-1-1
Bel-l-1
[Sc-11 (12-0) heme
He. 4 SC1-6-4 > Fold
SpPCi-3 a" SBPCS—1 7h; 5-(12)
SC1-6=(4)
+ SC=1 00599
~. O- co
tL.
Str Ctr Reset sae O.
Str Ctr Tivert SBP’ Rows .
Poste — 102°3%,05°6°7$R°° 50321, 2-1,..,12
1,-.,10 Str Ctr RO t
oO. poCleh, 5-1, ..,12 Fold
Buss

Str Counter”

Magnets

StF

STORAGE COUNTERS -continued=

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

SC-1, 0059

Str Ctr Reset NC
Str Counter
Invert NC

SBP Rows 3.57

Str Counter
RO Moldings

3C=. Str Ctr Reset
at eo

HA
fo}
t
an

CF;
iC
i
x)

SC-8

{

|sc-9

Str Ctr Invert SBP Rows RO
: Byees7 Moldings
on -
OF 7 7
rs
a an 5.
OF - oT
am i
. 5 7 ox)
od
tL. 5
i “hy - oP
oF o_
C5 os |
ot
t 5 .
“6 ~~
>. _
a i 0 .
7 aan
oo
t o >»
“8 7 oR
i °5 as
t fo >
G) ost.

£bP
STORAGE COUNTERS -continued—

vr

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

Sc-15 (2-1 1/2)
Reset=-10 NC
SBPo]—h,
SCl-6-1

SC-12 (11-14)
SBP=1~3
SC1-S~1

8C-12 (11-14)
SBP=1-3
SC1=S—2

9 or 10 Contact

SBP-1-6
SC3=3=1
9 or 10 Contact

FC-9L,

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
VBP=148
C=6-1-1 NC
Ca5=J—1 NC
C=4=1=1 NC
C=3-1-1
Cu2—1—2
Cmle1-h NC
SBP=~]-12

FC-100
(13-15 1/4)
Seq-10-1-1
SC-17(y-1L 1/2)
SBP-1-10
SC3-11-2 NC
SC3=3—3
ISBP—1.-12

Str Ctr Carry
Control
8C1-9-(4)

Str Ctr Carry
SC1-7,8-(12)

2h4th Col Carry
Scl-d1-th) or
SC1-10=(4

SC-15 (13-15 1/3] 24th Col Carry

eaera nk or
$C3-10-(4

Str Ctr Invert-
(12)

Invert (Minus
Absolute RO)-
(12)

SC--14

(2-14 1/16)
SEP=1-5
SC1-9=4,

SC--11 (12-0)
Invert~12

Sc--11 (12-0)
Invert-12

+ 8C-13 (2-1 1/2)
Reset~10

Dr

{SC-1, (2-14 1/16)

scl-9-4,
SBFCISS ve

+.s0-12 (11-14)

8C1-6-1
SBP=I-L, t,.0 Mt)

Str Ctr Carry
Control

_8C1-9-1
SBPSI=5 t Q =, Fou
“SCI“7,8=(12) Str Ctr Carry
+ SCe12 (11-14) ~ Faly
SC1-9-2 94 * Ci=T1-(4) 24th Col Carry
SEPCi=3 or)
SC1-10~(4)
$C3-3=1 9 c3=n- Ath Col Carry
SEL: well neers
SC3-10-(4)
+ FC-9L (12 1/2-13 2/3)
mene eH pa
Cahn lL
C-3-1-1
“ 4 Co2-1+2 Str Ctr Invert
OF Cn ld, u
SC-11 (12-0 to ; - Fe
= 7 _Invert~12 SBP=1-12 Dtvért—(12)
4
4+ FC-100 (13-15 1/4)
a= Seq-10-1-1 SC3=11~2 Minus Absolute RO
oh. SC-17 (1b-Ly, 1/2)"4 SC3-3-3 Pu,
orI0 550 vert—(12)
|sc-11 (12-0)
H unvert~12
2

STORAGE COUNTERS -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Cireuit Diagram

FC=100

(13-15 1/4)
Seq-ll-1-1
SC-18(14-1, 1/2)
SBP-l-11
SC3~11=2

SC3-3-3

ISBP-1~12

SC-16
(14-15 1/3)
SBP-1-7
SC1-6~-2
sc1-3-2
SBP-2-12

$C-10

(12-12 1/2)

SBP-1-1

Str Ctr Carry
Contacts

SC1~7,8-1,..,12

S8C1-11,10-1

Invert (Plus
Absolute RO)-—
(12)

Str Counter
Reset~(12)

Str Counter
Magnets

SC-11 (12-0)
Invert-12

SC=-11 (12-0)
Reset-12

+ Biers 00 (13-15 1/h)
Seg-]1-1-1

r Ste46 (14-24 1/2
_}

$C3-11-2 Plus Absolute RO
SC3-3—3

+

\_+

© t_. 5 a Foly
SBPCL=-1L SarCamta overt (12)
SG (12-0)
olvert-12
¢
+ SC-16 (14-15 1/3)
4 © poCl-6-2 Str Ctr Reset
. ( pO) 4 psC1-3-2
SsC- 12-0 ~ Fel
Ej Reset-12 *SBPC2-12 Le (12)
t
( v/ ) SC1-12—2
+ SC-10 (12-12 1/2 .
| ~. ee Q_,carry Booster-
SBP=1-1 2 | 12-(4)
. F C1-7=1
9 ° t____.. 9 40ol 1
| 109
$01-7-2
9¢ 4. 9,001.2
10¢ ‘
_SC1-7-12
| jo 4 0 4001.12 .
SC]-13-2
t Carry Booster-
[oon tis 2, 13-(4)
a}
o01-8-1
9e ~ 4... 9 J001.13
10¢
| _,SC1-8-11
96 : 4 Q Col.23
109 | ‘
8C1-11-1 _,9C1-8-12
- : 0 ~ Fly
SC1-10-1 Col.eh

Str Ctr Magnets

ad

CYCLE 0, Assuming that it is desired to read from register R into storage counter 68, code 73, with the ganged carry control, the sequence
mecheniem reads the line of coding (R, 873, blank).

storage counter 68 in relay are picked up.

CYCIE 1, Through the special storage counter 68 in relay, the carry interlock relay, ganging the carry circuits of counter 68 and 69,

picked up.

HIGH ACCURACY

The sequence relays are picked up.

The storage counter 68 in relay and the special

Magnet

9 Cycle 0

Cycle 1

Seq-B-8=1
Seq-B~7=1
Seq-B+3-1,2,3
Sp68-In
§C68~In
Storage Counter Magnets
Carry Interlock=2
8068-9 Carry Control
8069-9 Carry Control
SC68-7,8 Carry
5069=7,8 carry

Lf}
VBP=225

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC+101 (3-2 1/3) FC=102 (4-9 3/4) | + FCH10). (3-2 11/3)
VBP-100 VBP~225 A Seq-31-1
Seq-31-1,2,3,4 |B-8-1-(4 B-3~1-4 VBP=100 [4 B-8
Reading Pins B-7=1-(4, B-7-l=h 4“ Dy pate (4)
B=3—1,2,3-(12) [B=3=3-11 Beaded oaks
Seq-31-3} Jj, B-7
2 | § D4 pe 7at(4)
Seqe31-4 od
eg~31-
__| , t_] "
~ Fo
qo eT 23-(12)
3—e11
[FC~202 (4-9 3/4)
="

OFF
HIGH ACCURACY -contimed-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-93 Sp68~-IN~(4) SC-11 (12-0) +,FC-99 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) SBP=2-2 and -1
VBP=14,9 SC6B—K4, VEP=149 RC B=7-]-2
B-8-1-1 Sp68-1 or
Be7-1-2 Sp68—4, Special Str Ctr IN
Be6-1-4 NC |sc-11 (12-0) Sp68~IN-(4)
B=5~1-7 NC —oSC68-6—4, “1
Be4-2=1 NC SBP=2~2 4 oSp68~1 B-2-5=2
Bu3-3-1 9-3 Fely
Ba2—5=2 NC LS pb 8=4, -
Bo1~9-3 NC t
FC-93 SC68-4,,5=(12) SC-11 (12-0) + FC-93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |scéa6~(4) SBP=2-2 8-1-1
VEP=149 SC68-6~4 VBP=149 = {__,B-7=]-2
B-8-1-1
Be7ol=2 Normal Str Ctr IN
B-6-1-4 NC SC68-4,,5=(12)
B=5=1-7 NC = SC68-6-(4)
B-4-2=1 NC =)
B-3=3-1 1-9-3
B-2-5-2 NC
Be1-9-3 NC sep (12-0) Sp6s=1 F~ly
Sp68-1 6 oSlb8=b—4 =
SBP=2-2 a re
SC=-13 (2-1 1/2) [Carry Interlock-[SC-14 + 80-13 (2-1 1/2) 8-3
Reset~-10 NC 2~(6) (2-14 1/16) t~+10 ri mon Po
SBP-2—4, SBP-2—5 3 Carry Interlock-2-(6)
Sp6s8-3 cI-2-6 “1, (2-14 1/16) SBP-2—, |
Sp69-3 o- oCi-2-6
SBP=2-5 ry
SC=13 (2-1 1/2) {Carry Control  {Sc-14 + SC-13 (2-1 1/2)
Reset=10 NC SC68-9=(4) (2-14 1/16) = Reset~10 Str Ctr Carry Control
SBP~2=h, ISBP-2=5 Sco, (2-14 1/16) C6861. SC68-9=(4)
SC68~6=1 SC6B~—Jmdy = 5. _~8C68+9-4, SBP=2-4 Q a= Peis
SBP=2-5 rw ]
SCH13 (2-1 1/2) parry Control rere /6) + 80-13 (2-1 1/2) { fI-2-5
Reset-10 NC SC69= Fal 2-14 1 eset-10 4
SBP-2-4, SBP--2=5 b= 1,
SC69-6-1 SC69-9=4, SG=U, (2-14 1/16) SBP=2-4 t - ,F=1,
—o 0 8C69-9-4 tr Ctr Carry Control
SBP=2-5 ri 8C69-9=(4)

Lr

HIGH ACCURACY -continued-

VF

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

SC-10
(12-12 1/2)
SBP=2=1.
Str Ctr Carry
Contacts
SC68-T=1, «0,12
SC69-8-1,..,12
$C68-11,10--1
SC69-7Feal, «4,12
SC69--8-1, 44,12
SC69--11,10--1

Counter Magnets
Ctrs 68 and 69

CH10 (1212 1/2)

SBPCs-11
Cow
1 ‘ SC68-7—1
ecolhl 9 o 2 QA
,_.. 10¢
i hee
col.2 96 o ont eo
L 10¢
5 SC68—8-11
co1.23 96 t Q
10
- “+ OS)
S8C68-ll-1 SC68=8--12
a rene o"* 0
SC68-10-1_ (cr-2-1
a |
col.24 ; 4
pI-2-2
CIa2eJj, y
a a _ + 4]
a ‘ Cou
oSC69-7=1
col.l 96
| CO
‘ S8C69=-7=2
eol.2 9 , — t ,. .04
pn OY
5C69=8-11
col.23 9.6 4. _.0
t 10¢ ;
8C69-11-1 _,SC69-8--12
ul t_.—_.0
SC69=10-1)
-.—_+

col.2h

nter 68
col. 1

col. 2

col. 23

col. 24

iter 69
col. 1

col, 2

col. 23

col. 2h

CYCLE 0,

counter 70 is picked up.

CHOICE COUNTER

The sequence mechanism reads the Miscellaneous code 432 and picks up the corresponding sequence relays,
Through the choice relay the storage counter 70 24th column carry relay is picked up.

The choice relay of
If there is a 9 standing

in the 2hth column of counter 70, the energized choice relay completes a circuit to pick up the storage counter invert relay.

Magnet 9 Cycle O g Cycle 1 9
Seq-C-4-1,2 ]
Seq-C=3-1,2,3 J
SeqnC-2-1,..56 J
Choice Relay mt
S8C70-11 24th Column Carry }
Storage Counter Invert
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-101 (3-2 1/3) FC-102 (4-9 3/4) | + FC-101 (3-2 1/3)
VBP=100 Co4-1~(12) VBP=225 A Seq-31-1
Seq-31-1,2,3,4  |C-lh-2-(6) C= 26 VEP=100 7 4 Cah
Reading Pins’ {C-3-1,2,3-(12) |¢-3-3-11 q+? D4 6 yete(12)
Co2=1,..,52(12) JC-2-6-6 Seq-31-2 a2—6 C-h-2-(6)
Cu2-6-(6) ar’ TI
Seq-31-3 C-3°
ry | yt Ly 62301,2,3-(12)
B-3-11
¢
Seqn=31=4) A
: C=2 Q F-18
{ C-271,..,5=(12)
6-6 C=2-6-(6)
FC=102 (4-9 3/4)
VEP=225
FC~9h, Choice Relay-(6) |SC=15 + FCH94 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) (13-15 1/3) C-6—1-1
VBP=18 SBP~2=6 =1h C-5-1-1
C=6—1~-1 NC Choice-6 Cmhal=-1
C=5-1-1 NC 4 Ca3-1-2
C-ha-1-1 t Cm2—1=4,
C=3-1-2 ( /3) C-1-1-8
C-2-1-4 8C-15 (13-15 1/3 to ~ Fel
C=1-1-8 NC a. Choice-6 Qensiss
SBP=2-6 a Relay-(6)

67
CHOICE COUNTER -continued-

Circuit Diagram

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit
FC-9h, 24th Column 8C-15 + FC-9, (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) Carry (13-15 1/3) oO. ro21-1
VBP-1148 SC70-11-(4) | SBP=2—6 VBP=148 C-5-1-1
C61 NC Choice-1 Caled)
~5e=1 NC: a__Co3-1-2
CHa l-1 OT C-2n 1h
C~3-1-2 C~1-1-8
Ca2—1-4
Colede8 | NC
Choice { Choice~6 ;
Choice-1 ry Choice-1 > Fel,
9 Contact [SC-15 (13-15 1/3) naar? > Serge (4)
. 10p 24th Col, Carry
SBPCIR=h
SC~16 Str Counter SC+11 (120) + SC=16 (4-15 1/3)
(4-15 1/3) Invert-(12) ‘Invert-12 Pa SC70~11-3
SBP a2—7 SBP=2—{7 Choice-2
SC70-11-3 ~ Pel
Choice=2 SC=11 (12-0) pppoe eivertet12)
SBP=1-12 AY _Invert-12
4

If the code Out 7321 or In 7321 is read by the sequence mechanism, the normal storage counter 71 out control or the normal storage counter

71 in control relay is energized, These in turn control the pick up of the normal storage counter 71 out and normal storage counter 71 in

relays respectively,

CYCLE O,

line of coding (853, R, blank).
storage counter out relays 2 and 3 are picked up.
register R, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (8531, I, blank).

MIO COUNTER (Normal)

MIO CCUNTER (Special)

Assuming that columns 13-24, of the KIO counter are to be read to columns 13-24 of register R,
The sequence relays are energized,

(shifted) relay is energized and in turn the normal storage counter out relay 3 is picked up,

Assuming that columns 13-2, of register R are to be read into columns 13-24 of the MIO counter, the sequence mechanism reads the
The special in (direct) relay is energized and through it the normal

line of coding (R, 853, blank).
of the

storage counter in relays 5 and 6 are picked up.

counter,

The sequence relays are energized.
Assuming that columns 1-12 of register R are to be read to columns 13-24

the sequence mechanism reads the ‘line of coding (R, 8531, blank), Through the corresponding sequence relays,

(shifted) relay is energized and in turn the normal storage counter in relay 6 is picked up.

CYCLE 1.

energized carry back control relay opens the carry circuit from column 12 to column 13
24 to column 13.

The carry impulse may then complete the MIO counter entry.

the sequence mechanism reads the
The special out (direct) relay is energized and through it the normal
Assuming that columns 13-24 of the MIO counter are to be read to columns 1-12 of
Through the corresponding sequence relays, the special, out

If reading into the MIO counter, the carry control, carry, 24th column carry and carry back control relays are energized.
and closes an end around carry circuit from colum

the special in

OsP
MIO COUNTER -contimed-

Magnet 9 Cycle O 9 Cycle 1 9
T
Sequence relays im | }
SC71-14 Normal Str Ctr Out Control
$C71-1,2,3 Normal Str Ctr Out
SC71-16 Normal Str Ctr In Control A OE A SD |

8C071-4,5,6 Normal Str Ctr In
SC71-15 Special Out (direct)
SC71~18-1,2 Special Out (shifted)
SC71-17 Special In (direct)
SC71-19-1,2 Special In (shifted)
8C71-20 Carry Back Corittrol
Storage Counter Magnets

ialedad dad

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-92 Normal Str Ctr [SC=11 (12-0) + FC-92 (12 1/2413 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) Out Control SBP-2-2 AwBel-1
VBP~150 8C71=-14-(6) SC71-14-6 VBP=150 A-7—-l-1
A-8=1-1 NC Normal Out Control
Aw7=lel SC71-14-(6)
A~6=1=2 NC
A~5—1=3 NC
A-b-1-5 NC A An2a2=6
An3 21-9 |SC-11 (12-0) t_pAr1-3-12
A-2—2—6 ~. oC71-14~6
A-1-3-12 SBP=2-2 comer Fe
SC-11 (12-0) Normal Str Ctr + SC-11 (12-0)
SBP=2Q—2 Out poC71-Uy-1 Normal Str Ctr Out
SC71-1,-1 SC71-1~(12) ‘SBPO3—2 = F-ly
8C71=1-(12)
S8C=11 (12-0) Normal Str Ctr + SCe1l (12-0)
SBP-2=2 Out (12) _SC71-1~2
SC71~14-2 8C071-2-(12 le Normal Str Ctr Out
SC71-15=1 SC71-15-1__]
t - Fel,
2 $C71-2-(12)
SC-11 (12-0) Normal Str Ctr + SC-11 (12-0)
SBP-2-2 Out
8C71-14-3 8C071-3-(4)
8C71]-15-2 Normal Str Ctr Out
8C71~18~2<1 $C71-3-(4)
Q ~~ Fely

SF

MIO COUNTER -continued-

Pick Up Cirsuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

FC-93

(12 1/213 2/3)
VBP-1,9
B-8-1-1 NC
Be7-1-1
B-6-1-2 NC
B-5-1-3 NC
B-L-1-5 NC
B=3-1=9
Be2n2~6
B-1-3-12

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP=2=2
SC71-16-1

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP-2=2
S€71-16-2
SC71-17-1

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP -2—2
SC71-16=3
SC71-17=2
SC71-19-2-1

Normal Str Ctr
In Control
SC71-16~(6)

Normal Str Ctr
In
$C71-4~(12)

Normal Str Ctr
In
SC71~5~(12)

Normal. Str Ctr
In
SC71-6-(4)

Special Out
(direct-cols.
13-24 to cols.
13-24)
SC71-15-(6)

SC-11 (12-0)
SBP =2=2
SC71=16-6

sc-11 (12-0)
SBP=2-2
SC71~15-6

93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
+ 2,
VBP=19 = JojJ—1
4 obo? Normal In Control
jo 5am a3 8C071-16-(6)
— m1-5
1-9 6
5 SC71-16~6 a
SBP=2-2 t yr
+ SC-11 (12-0) Normal Str Ctr In
o _SC71=-16-1 $C71-4-(12)
SBP2-2 tg ene Fels
+,SG-11 (12-0)
SC71-16-2 Normal Str Ctr In

SBPC2—2 SC71-5-(12)
c71=-17=1

4 Oe Fed

+SC-11 (12-0)
[=s C71-16~3

SBP=2=2 t_.

W-17 2 Normal Str Ctr In
4__._] 8C71-6-(4)

C7L-19—2—1,

+F0-92 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
Av&-1=1

|SC-11, (12-0)
=a

_ oy. oo071-15~6
SBP=2-2 t

Special Out (direct)
$C71-15=(6)

oSh

MIO COUNTER -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-92 Special Out SC~11 (12-0) + FO-92 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |(shifted-cols. |SBP~2-2 im ongAn8-1-1
VBP-150 13-24 to cols. |8C71-18-2-6 _ VBP=L AunJa1-2
A-8=1-1 1-12) A-b~163 Special Out (shifted)
A~7—1-2 NC 8C71-18-1-(12) A-5-1-5 8C071-18-1-(12)
A-6-1-3 NC SC71-18-2-(6) A-h~1-10 SC71~18-2-(6)
An5=1-5 en ae
A-h=-1-10 NC A-2-h=2
A-3-2-7 SC=11 (12-0) OE pele7-3
A-2-4=2. NC “Ht >. SC71-18-2-6 -
An1-7=3 SBP=2=2 as t+ Qeeg
FC-93 Special In SC-11 (12-0) + FC-93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |(direct-cols. SBP=2=2 H 5 oB=821-1
VBP-149 13-24 to cols. |SC71-17~6 P=1)9 Be7-1=2
B-8-1-1 13-24) B-6-1-3 Special In (direct)
B-7~1-2 NC 8C071-17=(6) B-5-1-5 8C71-17-(6)
B=6-1-3 NC B-4,-1-10
B-5-1-5 tio B-3-2-7
B-4-1-10 NC Be2=4-2
B+3-2-7 SC-11 (12-0) Be1-743
B=-2=4—2 NC , a S8C71-17-6 ~
Bel=7=3 NC SBP=2—2 oO * =Ly
FC-93 Special In SC-11 (12-0) + FC$93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |(shifted-cols. |SBP-2-2 B~8=1-1
VBP-149 1-12 to wls. SC71-19-2-6 a Be7=1=2
B-8=l=1 13-24) B-6-1-3 Special In (shifted)
Be7=1=-2 NC 8C71~19-1-(12) B-5-1=5 SC71-19~1-(12)
B-6~1-3 NC 8C71-19-2-(6) B-4=-1-10 SC71-19-2~(6)
B-5-1-5 ° t Ba3-2=7
B-4-1-10 NC B-2-4-2
B=3=2-7 SC~11 (12-0) oS B73
B-2-4-2 NC CO. SC71-194-2-6 , -
Bel-7=3 SBP=2=2 ar t—O-rq-
SC=13 (2-1 1/2) |Carry Back SC-1, + SC-13 (2-1 1/2)
Reset-10 NC Control (2-14 1/16) 7 Reset-10
SBP=-2-4 SC’71-20-(6) SBP-2=5 nA _SC71=“17=3
SC71-17-3 8C71-20-6 SHP=2—], . - Fal,
$C71-19-2-2 lsork=rgza2
t | Carry Back Control
[SC-1, (2-14 1/16) 8071-20~(6)
SC71~20-6
at t

GP

MI0Q COUNTER ~contimed-

rSP

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
SC-10 Str Counter + 80-10 (12-12 1/2), SC71-12~2
(12-12 1/2) Magnets a y 4
SBP--2-1 SBP=2=1 4SC71-12-3 Q..carry Booster~12-(4)
Str Ctr Carry t =
Contacts 7 SC71-7-1
SC71-7,8-1,..,12 - 9 ‘ QJcol.1
sc71-11,10-1 ” 109 7
SC71-20-1 _ < SC71-7=2
oe a Q_ 4001.2
L_ 109
SC71-7-12
i o4! t <Q A0ol-12
| S¢7i-13-2 _ g_lcarry Booster-13=(4)
-
Hooks = Sc71-20-1
{1 _
96 ~ Q Col.13
109 |
— _SC71-8-11
%% ry Q C01.23
= 109
SC71+11~ _SC71-8+12
110-1 ¢ . ~ Col.2k
SC71-10-17 t+—-— 04 = FH,
| — Str Ctr Magnets

AUTOMATIC CHECK COUNTER

CYCLE ©, Assuming that a positive tolerance is stored in switch R, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (R, 74, 7), and steps
to the next line, The corresponding sequence relays and through them the switch R out ard storage counter 72 in relays are energized.

CYCLE 1, The tolerance is read from switch R into storags counter 72. Assuming that the quantity to be checked lies in storage counter
A, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (A, 74, 71), and steps to the next line, The corresponding sequence relays and through
them the storage counter A out relay, the storage counter 72 in relay and, if necessary to provide the negative absolute value, the stor=
age counter invert relay are energized.

CYCLE 2, The negative absolute value of the quantity standing in counter A is read inte counter 72. The normal carry circuits are closed
and the carry impulse completes the entry. The sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (blank, blank, 64),and steps to the next line,
The corresponding sequence relays are energized and through them the check control relay is picked up. If the absolute value of the quan-
tity read in from counter A is less than the tolerance, the 24th column tens carry contact is made and the check relay is picked up.

CYCLE 3, The energized check relay closes a circuit shunted across the start relay points to pick up the read control relay and the
clutch magnet. Thus the calculator continues in operation only if the check relay is picked up.
AUTOMATIC CHECK COUNTER ~continued

Magnet

9 Cycle 2

9 Cycle 3 9

SeqeC-6=1

Seq-C-4-1,2

Seq-8=1 Check Control
8C72=9 Str Ctr Carry Control
SC72-10 24th Column Carry
Check Relay
Seq=31-1 Read Control and Clutch Magnet

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-101 (3-2 1/3) FC-102 (4-9 3/h) |_+,FC-101 (3-2 1/3) gSeas31-1
VBP=100 VBP-225 Ef 5 ti,
Seq-31-1,2,3,4  |C-6-1-(6) C-6-1-6 VBP=100 Seq-31-2 «oc
Reading Pins C-h-1-(12) CH 2-6 ry 6-1-6 C-6-1-(6)
C=4-2~(6) Seq-31-3 .
tJ
(a9 3/4) <h ab Bina a2)
LFC-102 (4-9 3/4 4 J = ~jnl-
= oOo ry Cwm 2=(6)
VBP=225
FC=96 (2-1 1/3) |Check Control | FC-102 (4-9 3/4) | + FC-96 (2-1 1/3)
VBP-172 Seq-8~1-(4) VBP=225 op b-1-2
C=6-1-2 Seq-8-1-3 VBP=172 C-5=1-2
C=5=l-2 NC an Me ses,
C-hwl=3 Check Control
C-3-1-6 NC ( I) Seq-8-1-(4)
C-2=1-11 NC [FC-102 (4-9 3/4 Co1-2—'
C-1-2-9 NC H x pseg~8-1+3 =~ F-17
VBP=225 ra
SC-12 (11-14) [Str Ctr 24th +,SC=-12 (11-14) ‘ ;
SBP=2-3 Col. Carry = 0 SC72-9=-2 — 24th Column Carry
SC72-9=2 S072~10-(4) BP=2-3 rs : 9 ”:~C«SC7 214,
10 Contact ; 10¢ Q —~ + Fel,
SCm12 (11-14) [Cheek Relay-(4) {SC-11 (12-0) +3012 (11-14)
SBP~2=3 SBP=2—=2 pSC72-10~2 _Seq-8-1-1 Check Relay=(4)
SC'72=10-2 Check-4 BP= 23
Seq-8~1-1,2 Se ~ Den Polk
[sc-11 (12-0)
Check=4,
, BPx2e. ’

GSP

AUTOMATIC CHECK COUNTER -continued-

SP

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

FC=1C5 (4-2 1/2)

Sequence Cut-off
Switch

Card Feed #1 Sw.

Card Feed #2 Sw.

BBP=64

Check-1

BBP=54

FBP-S8

Seq-32-1-1,2 NC

Control Relay
Seq-31-(4)

FC#105 (4-2 1/2)
* H /.

/ Lf
Seq.Sw. C.F.#1 Sw. C.F.#2 Sw. BBP=6h ~ 4

Check-1
“BEPOSL, EPCOS ]
Read Control
Seq-31-1-(4,)
LPs
var FH19

Clutch Magnet

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE O

To start multiplication, assuming the MC to lie in counter 8, code 4, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (4, 761, blank), The

sequence relays are picked up.

The miltiply #1 and #2 relays are picked up.
storage counter out and intermediate counter in relays are picked up.

Magnet 9

0 _9

Seq-27 Repeat
Seq-33 Start
Seq-31 Control
Seq-A-h-1,2
Seq-B-7-1
Seq-B-6-1
Seq-B-1-1,..,11
4l Multiply #21
38 Multiply #2

50 Intermediate In
58 DD=PQ Reset
HD-6 DDePQ Reset

Sequence Counter Magnet
SC8=-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out

ar:

The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 1.
The DD=-PQ reset relays are picked up.

The

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
Seq-27=1 Start iFC=108 (6-2 1/2) | + Seq-27-1
VBP-276 Seq=33-(4) VBP-278 103 (65 1/2)
FC=103 (6-5 1/2) Seq-33-4 eo EE, Et ge Secat-2
VBP=277 |FC-10; 21/2 VBP=277 r > F-18
Seq-27~2  ELL_5___$eq-33-4 Lat
VBP=278 4 Seq-33-(4)
|FC-105 (4-2 1/2) ontrol + FC-105 (4-2 1/2) Seq-32-1
Sequence Cut-off Beq-31-(4 / 4 ”. Seq-33-1 - F-18
Switch Séq.Sw. O.F #1 Sw. CoP. #2 Swe BEPSOR? Seq-32-2) ooh
Card Feed #1 Sw. Seq~31-(4)
card Feed #2 Sw. 1 6
BBP=64, Seq—31- ading Pins - Fel
Seq-33-1 ii frhn2-6 Nr -(12)
Seq—32-1,2 NC Seq-31-2 4 Awh=2=(6)
+ FC+101 (3-2 1/2) [OE 1 <o

{FC~101 (3-2 1/2) Bequence C=102 (4-9 3/h) | 77] 1-3 B-7  B-7-1-4 B-7=)~(1,)
JVBP~100 A-4=1-(12) Pm 225 4} |
Reading Pins BH7-1=(1,) J=1-h Be6 [BH6~2=4, B-6-1-(4)

B~6-1-(1,) 6-1-1, |FC~102 (4-9 3/4) 4 __]

Be1-1,..,11-(12) B-1-11-11 ( «0 - Fa17

VBP=225 Bel [B-2-11-11 Bel-1,..,11-(12)
aa

LSP

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 0 ~contimed-

SSP

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-95 (2-1 1/3) |Muitiply #1  [AB-1-1 NO or =|] + FOH95 (2-11/3)
VBE-171 41-1,2-(12) CC=52 (1/3 316) 8-1-2
Be8-1-2 NC and rene B-7-1-3
Bp 41-2-11 Lee ~bn 15
1 5-1-4
Be5-1-4 NC L8-1-1 t—~ Beh-1+7
Bey-1-7 NC __ 3a2=1
B-3-2~1 NC —— ~2-3~1
Be2~3=1 NC |oc-52 (1/3 3-16) ja-1-f-1  MD-37
Be-1-5-1 a= 4]-2-11 rn -
ar '
Multiply #1
4l-1,2-(12)
CC=49 (1-0 1/3) | Multiply #2 48-1-1 NC or + CC-49 (1-0 1/3)
41~2~5 38-1,2,3-(12) | CC-52 (1/3 3-16) EF 1-2-5
and 4 ums YD=37
38~3-11 1y8-1-1 ND aN eiply #2
a . 38-1,2,3-(12)
loc-52 (173 3-16
as = 83-11
~ ed
CC-10 (0-C 1/2) | Sequence Counter + CC-10 (0-0 31/2)
38-3-3 Magnet —~Fy (38-3-3
U-1-3 NC ‘° 4-1-3
Bh-l-1 NC 8-1-1
- MD~13
— DY Sextence Counter Magnet
FC=92 Storage Counter | SC-11 (12-0) + FC-92(12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) | #8 Out SC8=3=4 A-8=1-1
VBP=150 SC8-1,2-(12) WPeI50” AeJolel
A-8~1-1 NC 8C¢8-3-(4) AwbmL-1
Avfeded Ni A-5-1-1
A~6=1=1 NC name ST Gea os
A-5=1-1 NG “OF AR 3-1-2
A-Le 1-1 An2=1-3
A-3-1-2 NG SC~11. (12-0) OEE sas F-14
A-21+3 NC =| SC8-3-4 -
Anl~1-5 NC ry —pvl~~

Storage Counter Out
SC6-1,2-(12)
SC8-3~(4)

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 0 -continued-

—,

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

Uy-l-4, NC
CC=55

(12° 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO Bel
41-1-1

UWye1-4, NC
CC=57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D-1
41-1-2

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP-31-32-33
58-8-12
58=4-11,12
CC=62 (14-0)

Intermediate In
50-1,2,3-(12)

DD-PQ Reset
58-1, .,8-(12)

DD-PQ Reset
HD-6—(12)

CC-43 (12-0)
ABP=31-32=33
50-3-11

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP=31-32-33
58-8-12
5eh-11,12

+ U-l-4

(12 1/2-13 2/3)

0.0 0.0,0_.0.0

0 2°34 567 °8°9 _ y-1-1
Seq Ctr RO Bel ar = MD-L3
ccH43 (12-0) r— Qa emediate In
950-3-11 50~1,2,3-(12)
ABP=31-32=33 A
7 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
°° 1 2930405? 6°7°8°9 ‘4-1-2
Seq Ctr RO D-1 “ k - }0-39
~PY Reset
58-8-12 58=1,.5,8-(12)
ABP=31=32-33 ry
B-=11
4__}
S112
a1
CC-62 (14-0)
= MD-16
-PQ Reset
HD=6=(12)

The MC is read from storage to the intermediate counter,
carry impulse completes the entry into the intermediate counter.
negative MC) picks up the intermediate 24th column read-out control relay.
to read-out position 2.

MC is negative.

counters (1-2), (36), (5)

CYCLE

circuiting the number impulses when the counters are in motion,

2

The DD and PQ counters res

The intermediate counter carry control and carry relays are picked up and the
The entry of a nine into the 24th column of the intermediate counter (a

et, The sequence counter is advanced

In preparation for the next cycle, the intermediate invert control and intermediate invert relays are picked up if
The "no shift" relays and MC-DR in relays are picked up in order to read the MC from the intermediate counter to the MC-DR
(7) and (9). The entry control relays on MC-DR (1-2) and (3-6) prevent the miltiple molding counters from short

6SP
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 -continued-

23 Intermediate Carry Control
53 Intermediate Carry
89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control
58 DD-P) Reset
HD-6 DD-PQ Reset
PQ Counter Magnets
DD Counter Magnets
Sequence Counter Magnet
94, Intermed:late Invert Control
HD Intermediate Invert

1-2
3-6

Magnet 5 fo) 9
41 Multiply #1
38 Multiply #2
SC8-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
50 Intermediate In
Intermediate Counter Magnets ll oll oll oll all ll ade a
|

09F

Pick Up Circuit

92 MC=-DR Entry Control
Magnet Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

sc-1, 0099
Str Ctr Reset NC
Storage Ctr
Invert NC
Str Ctr BP
Str Ctr RO
SC8-1-1,..,
SC&-2-12
BBP=$65, 0,88
50~1-1,..;
50-2-12

CCH4h (2-1 1/3)
50-3—-1

CO<h5
(1/16 11-13)
231-1

Intermediate
Counter Magnets

3 MC-DR In
+ Stele) .
a ee

36 Shift.
91 MC-Dit Entry Control

Str Ctr
Reset

Invert

53-1,2-(12)

Str Ctr Str-Ctr BP

SCB-l-1,..
01° 2°3 914 560799? S08-2-12 *  S0n1-1,..,
Str Ctr KO 50-2=12

Intermediate CC-46 (2-13 1/3)| + CC-44 (2-1 1/3)
Carry Control | ABP-35 “TT ~_§0-3-1
23-1~(4) 23-14 or aa Q eat AD~35
CC+46 (213 1/3) ; ntermediate
- 231-1, Carry Control
ono 23-1--(4)
Intermediate # CC-45 (1/16 11-13)
Carry EL e3cl-1 =, MD-43

Intermediate Carry
53-1,2=(12)

BBP-65, + 588 = MD-L
Intermediate Counter Magnets

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
cC=12 Intermediate “ Intermediate Intermediate
(12-12 1/2) Counter Carry Contacts Carry Relay
Intermediate Magnets Intermediate
Counter Carry BBP- 142 | 53-1-1 Counter Magnets
Contacts + CCH12 (12-12 1/2) col. 1 9 ry
53-1,2-12 ET ~ 107] . percrgs 24 coi. 1
Carry Booster Carry~BP
12-2,3 eee
Carry Booster col. 2 9¢@ 4
13=2,3 | 109] AQ coi. 2
1 5321-7
col. 7 9¢@ ar
"105 WD col. 7
Carry Booster-
| 12-(4) O--
Booster-12-2
ry - WD-7
ooster=12-3
|
1,8 96 7
col. ra
109 . DA col. 8
2372-10
col.22 9¢ ry
| 109 QA 601.22
_53-2-11
col.23 98 ry Q
10¢ BP=14,0 col.23
32-12
col.2h 96 ; ry ~ MD-1
109¢ > BBP-144 BEPCTIG Osh. 24,
Carry Booster-13 lies between columns 18 and 19,
24th col 3rd Intermediate +
midg 9 spot 24th col RO ° a0000
Intermediate | Control 07192°3°1,°5°6 7°89 = }(D-39
Counter 89-1-(4) Intermediate Counter RO Intermedjate 24th col RO Control
2hth col 3rd midg 89-1-(4)

197

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 =continued-

Pick Up Cireuit Magnet Hold Circuit Cireuit Diagram
CCL, oo 99 PQ Counter + CC-1 (1-1 1/2)
HD=-6=1, 2459 Magnets =i PQ RO
58~l-L,.e, HD-6—1  col.1
58-,-10 i obo op8e1-1 col.L

foc-2 (2-2 1/2)
TEL

loc-3 (3+3 1/2)

|oc-4 (1-4 1/2)
=n

j~L1
through
HD-6=2
| Yo Zo} + oSBthe10 col .46
4 4 ——* Mp~12
PQ Counter
~)HD-6=3 Magnets
-v ordo4 col.46 RO

|cc-5 (5-5 1/2)
azo

COmH (6-6 1/2)
TE

{ec-7 (7-7 1/2)
rE

HD-b-5
. o4
Ls
]HD~6-6
. 6 oH
rr

CO=8 (88 1/2)
TE

[oc-9 (9-9 1/2)

coF

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 ~contimed-

—
a

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit . Circuit Diagram
CCH1,..59 DD Counter +,CC-1 (1-1 1/2)
HD~6-1, 2.49 Magnets =| ; DD RO
5B=5aliee JHD-6~1  col,1
58-8-9 bolo, S851 cols 1
4 a, Q p-nr JD-9
[C2 (2-2 1/2)
=| through
]HD-6~2
26+ Bb8-9 col.45 10
———_-_+ * $$.) Wr D-
0-3 (3-3 1/2) f
DD Counter
HD-6-3 Magnets
3 oy to col.45 RO
\COmk (4-4 1/2) °
a="
pe-s-
jeC-5_ (5-5 1/2) [~
|HD-6-5
+65 Oo]
|CC-6 (6-6 1/2) —
HD~6-6
a 2 ° a
\cc-7_(7~7 1/2)
HD-6~7
a ee
CC-8 (8-8 1/2)
E41
Ps
ne. 9
cc-9 (9-9 1/2)
EL
1HD-6~9
P+ 9 om
a

CoP

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
38=3-3

UWy-1-3 NC
Shel=-1 NC

U-l-4 NC
CC-57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Str RO D=2

CC-69

(15-16 1/3)

9hn1H-1,2

9 in 24th col
Intermediate
Counter

lyele NC
CC=56

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO C-2
41-1-3

cc=33
(14-15 1/3)
= 212
3521,5-1 Ne
35=16-1 NC

Sequence Counter
Magnet

Intermediate
Invert. Contro‘l
94~1-(4)

Intermediate
Invert
HD-1~(12)

MC-DR In
43=1, oe 310-(12)
43-11,12~(4)

shift (No Shift)
36-37, 38-(12)
36-39=(4)

C043 (12-0)
ABP=31-32~33
h-1-h

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP~31-32--33
HD~1-12

CC#43 (12-0)
AEP+-31~32--33
43=10~-12
43~-12-3 4,

CC-43 (12-0)
ABP-31
36=-39-2

+ CC=10 (0-0 1/2)

re

“123
aE dtl
Q p~=,MD=13

Sequerice Counter Magnet

+ li-l-i,
CC-57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
0°1°293%,95%G°7%S°9°_ 1-1-4
Seq Ctr RO D-2 N =~ MD~38
OQ -fitstmediate Invert

CC-43 (12-0)
_ Shrink Control 94-1-(4)
ABP=31-32-33 t_._

+ C069 (15-16 1/3)
Shel-1 9 spot 4th midg

4 24th column
~i~2 | Intermediate Ctr
t

50 =, MD-46
C43 (12-0) ana ime remgiate Invert
La12 HD-1-(12

“1-4
am CC=56 (12 1/2=13 2/3)

0°1°2 301,507 BPG? hl~1--3 :
Seq Ctr ROC-2 CO

a= (12-0)

10-12
“REPLI CBO33 ’ MC-DR In
43D]
[_
3=12-4
+ CC~33 (14-15 1/3) 2__|
“_ge3e2-32
5ah5m1
[eC-43 (12-0) 63902 brhb-1 w-
a=i ~39~ —€ =, MD-41
near rn ——\L--shaty 36-37,38-(12)

36-39~(i)

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 1 -contined-

Control (3-6)
92-1,2,3-(12)

\cC-77 (16-0)
“Ht

3-12-2

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
cC~76 MC-DR Entry CC-77 (16-0) + CC-76 (15-16 1/2)
(15-16 1/2) Control (1-2) 91-3-12 ~T ET -12~1
L3-12-1 91-1,2,3-(12) if card
MC-DR Entry Control (1-2)
43=12-2 MC-DR Entry 92=3=12

91-1,2,3-(12)

=| MD-32
C=-DR Entry Control (3-6)

92-1,2,3-(12)

CXCLE 2

The sign control relays are picked up if the intermediate 24th column read-out control relay is up, The positive absolute value of the MC
reads from the intermediate counter to MC-DR counters (1-2), (3-6), (5),(7) and (9). The sequence counter advances to read-out position 3.

In preparation for the next cycle, the intermediate reset, first build-up, first and second build-up and the entry control relays for MC-DR
(3-6) and (4-8) are picked up.

Magnet

9

0 9

41 Multiply #1

38 Multiply #2

89 Intermediate 24th col RO Control

70 Sign Control #1

71 Sign Control #2

94 Intermediate Invert Control

HD-1 Intermediate Invert

43 MC-DR In

36 Shift

91 MC-DR Entry Control (1-2)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2)

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC~DR Counter Magnets (3-6)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (5
MC-DR Counter Magnets (7
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)
Sequence Counter Magnet

52 Intermediate Reset

HD-4 Intermediate Reset

44 First Build Up

45 First and Second Build VU

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)

-—

SOP
MULTIPLICATION

ON Cycle 2

~contimed=

S97

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Cireuit

Circuit Diagram

CO=9 (9-9 1/2)
43-6-12 or
39-3-2 or
57-32 and
89-11

cc-7 (7-7 1/2)
43ell=d
T-l~i2

COm1Ly w0y9
HD--1-1,..,10 NC
if MC was > 0
HD~l-1, oe 210 NO
if MC was < 0
HD=4=1, 20,9 NC
Intermediate RO
36~37e1 poey
36--38~12
L3~-l--1, cy
432-11
43—3—1 goes
43-411
A351, eos
43-611
43-71 gees
43-68-11
43=9-1 gees
43~10-11

cc-10 (0-0 1/2)
3b= 303

4-1-3 NC
Bh—L-1 NC

Sign Control #1
10~1~(4)

Sign Control #2
Tl-1-(4)

Counter Magnets

MC-DR (1-2)
MC-DR (3-6)
Mc-DR (5)
MC-DR (7)

MC=DR (9)

Magnet

Sequence Counter

cc-75 (11-8)
BBP=$145

or

BBP-60
52=3-6 NC
and.

70-1-4,

CC-74, (13 1/2=16)

436-12
jt +4.

+g 9 1/2)

(11-8)
BBP=145

713-1

+ CC-1, 2,9

+ CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
ET

a (7-7 1/2) as

(13 1/216)
+—— act

__§Dwicl,.. ,10
“E__ po:

: mane

or 2

or [57=3-2
|

4 | 891-1
t

wad

0°1°2°3°4,°5

0,,9,9 4° 0139 9°

Intermediate Ctr RO

8-3-3

1-3

8-1-2

=~ MD-39

Sign Control #1
70-1-(4)

4 ~ ,MD~38
Sy se Control #2
T1=1=(4)

36-37-1, a0,
b= =38-12 hj~1-1 poes
4 £3-2-11
tw pr?

MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2)

- 13
—saqre he toniter Megret

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 2 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
4-1-4 NC Intermediate CC-43 (12-0)
cC=57 Reset, ABP-31-32-33 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(2 1/213 2/3) 52-1,2,3-(12) 1 52-3-11
eq Ctr =
41-1-7 be
(12-0) Sequence Ctr RO D-3 4 = MD-43
2-3—11 Intérmediate Reset
ABP=31-32-33 4 52-1,2,3-(12)
My-1-4 NC Intermediate CC#43 (12-0) + 1-1-4
CC=57 Reset ABP-31~32=33 CC-57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(22 1/2-13 2/3) HD-4-(12) coma '
eq Ctr fon Cl i)
Ll-1-7 or 2° 3 Aes 67° eg 1-1-7
CC-61 (12-0) Sequence Ctr RO D-3 4 CC~61 (12-0)
(C-43 (12-0) o-3e11 = MD-46
0<0--0, pense. Intermediate Reset
ABP=31=32=33 0S HD=4,-(12)
UWy-1-4 NC First Build Up {CC-43 (12-0) + UW-1-4
CCH55 Abel, ee,5-(12) | ABP~31-32-33 CO-55 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
Ge V2-3 2/3) bbe 5-11
eq Ctr jo , .
hl=1-5 (2-0) O23 ESE TE —_pla-1-5
{cc 12-0) Sequence Ctr RO B-3 4 = MD~1,2
= 006k S11 NO Neer vU
ABP-31-32-33 _ Ahly osy5=(12
ly-l-4 NC First and Second{CC-43 (120) + Wel-4 ,
CC=56 Build Up ABP~31+32~33
(2 1/2-13 2/3) A5mL,o0y5e(12) 4 45-5=11
eq Ctr -
4-1-6 0719293745967 7° 8°G” 1-1-6
|cC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO 6-3 ~ b Diente
S521 First and Second Build Up
ABPoS1 232233 re A5q1,0+,5-(12)
CC=76 MC-DR Entry CC=77 (16-0) + CC-76 (15~16 1/2)
(15-16 1/2) Control (3-6) 92-3~12 TEL bm 5a8
4h-5-8 92-1,2,3-(12) ry MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
2—3—10 92=1,2,3-(12)
4 5-5-2 MC-DR Entry 93~3=12 bn 5=5=2
Control (4-8) CC-77 (16-0) - MD-32
93~1,2,3=-(12) Fy = “DR Entry Control (4-8)

LO
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 .

The intermediate counter resets. Sign Control. #1 drops out. If a nine stood in the 24th column of the intermediate counter a nine is read
to the 47th colum of the PQ counter. The first build up takes place; i.e., twice the MC is read from the doubling moldings of MC--DR (1-2)
to MC-DR (3-6), (4-8), (5) and (9). The MC-DR carry control and carry relays are picked up and the carry impulse completes the first build
up. Assuming the MP to lie in storage counter 20, code 53, the sequence mechaniem reads the line of coding (53, blank, blank), and the
sequence relays are picked up. The storage counter out and 4ntermediate in relays are picked up in order to read the MP to the intermediate
counter. The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 4. In preparation for the next cycle, the first and second build up,
second build up and the entry control relays for MC-DR (4-8) are picked up. ,

Magnet 9 ce) 9

Al Multiply #1

38 Multiply #2

52 Intermediate Reset

HD=-4, Intermediate Reset
Intermediate Counter Magnets p ae ]

70 Sign Control #1 = p

71 Sign Control #2
PQ -47th column Counter Magnet a

44 First Build Up

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (3-6) . A a

45 First and Second Build Ups

93 MC=DR Entry Control (4-8)
MC~DR Counter Magnets (4-8) : ;

NC-DR Counter Magnets (5)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)

26 MC-DR Carry Control

49 MC=-DR Carry

Seq-31 Control

Seq-A-5=1

Seq-A-3-1,2,3

'SC20-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
Sequence Counter Magnet fl

50 Intermediate In

45 First and Second Build Ups

46 Second Build Up

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)

Pick Up Circult Magnet Hold Circuit Gircuit Diagram
cc-9 (9-9 1/2) |PQ 47th column + CC+9 (9-9 1/2)
82-1-9 NC Counter Magnet ~~ 82-19
52-3-7 L__§2=3-7
T0-1=1 4 [0-1-1
4.9 pr?
FQ 47th col Counter Magnet

89P

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 -continued-

Icc-8 (8-8 1/2)
TEL

jec-9 (9-9 1/2)

HD-4=8
Pe oe ol

HD-4=-9
Pot 38 ol

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
COm1, 0099 Intermediate + CC-2 (1-1 1/2) Intermediate
HD-6=1, 0059 Counter Magnets A Ctr RO
S2mlel, ees HD-4-1 col.1
5202-11 and | Y oho, oidelel = col. 1
-3— _# ry Q
[CC-2 (2-2 1/2)
r through
HD+/=2
| y 4201 2-2-11 —c01..23
ee , f+. 0
\cC-3 (3-3 1/2) to col.23 RO
=
HD-4=3
o® 04 2035 col.24
4 - MD-1
[ccm4 (4-4 1/2) SL
g=5
HD=-1,—d, to BBP-141 and Intermediate
4 o4 col.2h RO Counter Magnets
jcc-5 (5-5 1/2) ——
[HD-4=5
| __ + a
|cC~6 (6-6 1/2)
PEL
[oma
|, a
\cc-7 (7-7 1/2)
EL
pea
oo

697
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 -continued—

LY

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

MC-IDR Doubling
Read=out

91-3-1 on
columns 1-6

91-3-2 on
columns 7-12
etc.

* Build Up RO
~ Reset RO
7 r ana {1-4-1

i inal L oll of! ini Doll oll of Impulses
aimmalene Tt 3 2

Fp PIs Hella
\ | 0

cae EE

rel aligiel [relies ei iret git 1
ell tial Hell ell diel pret aes .S
I | [ <3

rt f @almslmalne malale <2
ro Su SY me TILE T t 3
7

-o]) 9]| 9 ? —o 9 9 ? WO || 0 3 “ L

G1H3= bees
-—o ¢ > 9 ——o | « if ——-O 9 aie 9
q
) ~ 1 ~ Hb , Normal._Ro
> Doubling RO
column 3 column 2 column 1

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 -contimed-~

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit ‘ Circuit Diagram
CO=1, oe 59 + CO-1,.4059
HD-2—1,..,10 NC D-2-1,..,10
HD-5-1,..,9 NC 5m Ly oe yD
MC-DR (1-2)
Doubling RO 0,0_0.0.0 4h-l-1, 0,
Ahmlel, eo, MC=DR Counter 415.678 9 otinr2-12
Ah—2—12 Magnets (3-6) MC-DR (1-2) doubling RO 4.0 -3
LhaB-lyeey MC-DR Counter
Ah-b=12 Magnets (9) MC-DR Counter
os VC-DR Counter Magnets (3-6)
452-12 Magnets (4-8) :
L5=3=liees MC-DR Counter
L5mhn12 Magnets (5)
CC-44 (21 1/3) |MC-DR Carry CC-46 (2-13 1/2)] + CC-44 (2-1 1/3)
4-5-1 Control ABP=35 = : gid 5n)
26-1-(4) 26-1-h jcc- — = YD-35
H ~ _26-1= ~DR Carry Control
ABP=35 26—1-(4)
CC=45 MC-DR Carry + CC=45 (1/16 11-13)
(1/16 11-13) L9-1, «.10-(12) EL | 2bel-1
26~1-1 4 Q + YD-43
_ MC-DR Carry 49=1,..,10-(12)
ee /2) MC-DR Counter ( MC-DR carry Contacts (3-6) MC=DR Carry MC-DR Counter Magnets (3-6)
12-12 1/2 Magnets + CCm12 (1212 1/2 9
Carry BP HA _. col. 1 10¢ DQ, col. 1
Carry Transfer Carry BP fJele2 .
Contacts : 96 a Q
A9=1, «210-12 col. 2 109 . col. 2
WC-DR (36)
Carry Booster~1 96
MC=DR (4<8) \col.12 109 ee col.12
Carry Booster-2 : Booster=1-2 Carry :
MC=DR (5) Booster~1-(4)
Carry Booster-3 ooster=1-3
MC-DR (7) a, | -7
Carry Booster~1, |
MC-DR (9) _f9-2-1
Carry Booster-5 96 a Q
col.23 109 ° col.13
L9n2~12
go Lc pP
Jeol.24 10 QU col.

LY

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

FC$195 (4-2 1/2)
Sequence Cut-off
Switch

Card Feed #1 Sw.
Card Feed #2 Sw.
BBP=54 110
Lh5~1

BBP=111

FBP~133

216-1-2 NC

5 5-3-2 NC
78-28 NC
81-1--9 NC
BBP-52

FBP=99

201-1=2 NC
FBP=98 :
Seq-32-1,2 NC

FC-101 (3-2 1/2)
VBP~1.00
Seq-31la1, 09h
Reading Pins

FC~92
(22 1/2-13 2/3)
VBP-150
AnBele] NC
An7=1—1 NC
A=6-1-1 NC
A~5~1=1
A~-1-2 NC
A=3—1=3
w2=1-6 NC
Am=1-1=11 NC

Control Relay
Seq-31-(4)
Clutch Magnet

Aw~5-1-(12)
A-3~1,2,3=(12)

Storage Counter
#20 Out
SC20~1,2 =(12)
SC20-3-(4)

FC~102 (4-9 3/4)
VBP=225
AwwtimL—11
Am=3—3—11

SC=11 (12-0)
[SC20-~3=1,

+

C105 (4-2 1/2)
HERI Uy? M2) |

bm Sm1

. 0-0. = pte 5
Seq.Sw. C.l.#1 Sw. C.P.#2 Sw. BBPSOA 110 216-1-2
BEFCLIIFEPCI35 | F obife?

[_,78-2-8

RK g1-1-9

BBP=52 FBP=99

201-1-2

t_.

31-1
_ Reading Pins
5 sa
“9-3 TaS5-3-11
t_..
VBP OS25

FC-92 (12 1/213 2/3)

jsC-11 (12-0)

-6-1-1

A
_gicSel-

8020-3=4
4

A__frhmi-2

A~5=1+(12)

- F-16

~,F=18
Control Seq=31-(4)
| ~- F-19
Clutth Magnet

A-3=1,2,3-(12)

A~3-1-3

AQ=1~6
AmlL=1+11
Qy-F-u

Storage Counter Out
SC20-1,2~(12)
SC20—3=(4)

eLy

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 3 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

—

Circuit Diagram

CC=10 (0-0 1/2)
38=3-3

1-1-3 NC
84-1-1 NC

4-1-4 NC
CC=55

(12 1/213 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO B-4
41-1-8

lyw1l=4, NC
CC-56

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO C-4
41-1-9

1-1-4, NC
CC-57)

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
4l-1-10

cC-76
(15-16 1/2)
h5n5m2

Sequence
Counter Magnet

Intermediate In

First and Second
Build Up
45e1,.0,5-(12)

Second Build Up
46-1, .6,5-(12)

MC-DR Entry
Control (4-8)
93-1,2,3-(12)

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP~31~32-33
50-3-11

CC-43 (12-0)
ABP-31-32-33
45=5-11

CC-43 (12-0)
ABP=31-32=33
46-5~11

cC-77 (16-0)
93=3—12

+ CC-10 (0-0 1/2)

8-3-3

1-1-3
i ae

(12-0) Seq Ctr RO B-4

-,MD-13
equence Counter Magnet

023-11

ABP=31=32=33

(12 1/2-13 2/3)

Seq Ctr RO C=4

0°1°2°3°,; 5060785? psl-1-9

tarsal

Seq Ctr RO D=4

PEPSICO F233

+ 0C-76 (15-16 1/2)

dt
Ee (16-0) ry Q ~~ MD=32
3-37-12

4 > MD-43
~ Intermediate In
t_, 50-1,2,3-(12)

First and Second Build Up

. 45mn1, +. ,5-(12)

=~ -MD-42
Second Build Up
46-1,..55=(12)

MC=-DR Entry Control (4-8)

93-1,2,3-(12)

el?
The MP is read from storage to the intermediate counter as in cycle 1.
picked up and the carry impulse completes the entry into the intermediate counter as in cycle l.
of the intermediate counter (a negative MP) picks up the intermediate 24th column read-out control relay as in cycle 1.
up takes place; i.e., twice the MO
the doubling moldings of MC-DR (3-6) to MC-DR (7) and (9).
completes the second build up as in cycle 3.
the intermediate invert control and intermediate invert releys are picked up if MP is negative.

PLP

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 4

The intermediate carry control and intermediate carry relays are
The entry of a nine into the 24th colum
The second build
is read from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (4-8) and (5); six times the MC is read from
The NC~DR carry control and carry relays are picked up and the carry impulse
The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 5. In preparation for the next cycle
The MP in relay is picked up.

Magnet 9 0) 9

41 Multiply #1
38 Multiply #2
8C620-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
50 Intermediate In
Intermediate Counter Magnets
23 Intermediate Carry Control
§3 Intermediate Carry
89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control
71 Sign Control #2
45 First and Second Build U;
93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8
MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (5)
46 Second Build Up
MC-DR Counter Magnets (7) l
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)
26 MC-DR Carry Control
49 MC~-DR Carry
Sequence Counter Magnet
94 Intermediate Invert Control
HD-1 Intermediate Invert

id

iE

=

:
I

39 MP In TT
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CO=1, 0059 + CO=1 1059
HD=2-1, .«,1ONC “A.” gfD~2-2,..,10
HD=5=1, 259 NC ¥ HD=5-1, 2059
MC=DR (1-2)
doubling RO ee L5elelL, oe
h5elelyes, Wo-DR Counter, 0192930 85040704060 h5-2-12
45a2~12 Magnets (4-8 NMC=DR (1-2) doubling RO 4 Q -MD~:
L5-3-1l,eoey MC-DR Counter } ne ie
45~h-12 Magnets (5) MC-DR Counter
Lbnl=l,oey MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8)
46-2-12 Magnets (7)
6-3-1, 06, IMC-DR Counter
46-4~12 Magnets (9)

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 4 ~continued=

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC-10 (0-0 1/2) | Sequence Counter + CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
38-3-3 Magnet Ban Z—3
U-1-3 NC -1-3
8h-1-1 NC -j-1
13
Sequence Counter Magnet
l4-1-4 NO Intermediate CC=43 (12-0) + ly-1-4 :
CC=57 Invert Control] ABP=31-32-33 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(2 1/2-13 2/3) 9b-1-(4) Qhel-h,
eq Ctr -
qlel~12 0°1°2°391° ¥e07°9%6° 41-1-12 48
CC-43 (12-0 Seq Ctr RO D=5 - MD-
guatsy | ~2-“trtérmediate Invert
P=31=32=33 e_} Control 94-1-(4)
CC-69 Intermediate CC=43 (12-0) + 00-69 (15-16 1/3) 4-1-1
(15-16 1/3) Invert ABP-31-32-33 = 49 in 24th col
Mn1-1,2 HD=1-(12) HD-1~12 IJye1-2 |Intermediate Ctr ~ M46
9 in 24th col jCC-43 (12-0) { o--—4 Intermediate Invert
Intermediate HD-1-12 HD-1-(12)
Counter =31=32-33° fk
U-1-4 NC MP In CC=43 (12-0) + 1h-1-4
CC-55 39~1,2,3=(12) ABP-31-32-33 CCO-55 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) 39~3=11
Seq Ctr RO C~
qlel-11 ? (2-0) 03929391258 67° ao? Al-1-11
C3 (12-0 Seq Ctr RO CaH5 = }D-37
| aot fe
CYCLE 5

Sign Control #1 is picked up if the intermediate 24th column read-out control relay is up as in cycle 2, The positive absolute value of the
MP reads from the intermediate counter to the MP counter and simmltaneously the MP cycle control pick up relays, which are wired in parallel
with the MP counter magnets, are energized. The MP cycle control hold relays are set up by their pick up coils, The MP=DIV. = control
relay is picked up. The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 6, The intermediate reset relay ia picked up. The cycle counter
ie advanced to read-out position 1. The MP-DIV control hold relay 1s picked up preventing the sequence counter from advancing when CC=10
makes and further, preventing the passage of impulses from CC~55, 56 and 57 through the sequence counter read-out, The column shift left
and right relays are picked up, Impulses through the colum shift left and right relays and the 2nd read-out molding of the MP counter

energize the required times left and right relays, If MP is sero, the C2, D2 and DD-PQ transfer #1 relays are picked up in place of the
column shift relays as in cycle 8 (5 +n).

SLE
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 5 -continued-

Magnet 9 0 9

41 Multiply 41

38 Multiply #2

89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control
70 Sign Control #1

71 Sign Control #2

94 Intermediate Invert Control

HD=j1 Inzermediate Invert

39 MP In

MP Counter Magnets
37 MP Ccle Control
13 MP=DIV Control Pick Up

Sequence Counter Magnet LI
52 Intermediate Reset
HD-4, Intermediate Reset '

Cycle Counter Magnet
14, MP-DIV Control Hold
21 Colwnan Shift Left
29 Colwnn Shift Right

LUT

4 Times Left
5 Times Right
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
COm1,y 0099 MP Counter + COm1 40059
HD~1-1, 60,10 NC Magnets = HD=1-1,,..,10
HD=4e1, 2259 NC ‘i i ere
Intermediate MP Cyele Contro}| geet
Counter RO Pick Up 39-l1=1, 2.
39-11, oi? 2250,8 5°607°8°G” 9-2-1] HO-2-1,..,
39~2—11 MP Cycle Control] CC-41 (12-15) Intermediate Ctr RO” 4 O—3-11 MP Ctr Magnets
4On2=1 NCyeey Hold ABF~34, \CC-41 (1215) t Q ~ 2, MD=8
40-3=11 NC 37-1, 60526= or -_
(4, 6 or 12) | BBF-133
30-1-1,2,8,9 NC
31-1-1,2,8,9 NC
ancl
372-3 ans
B37 ahyn3 37=2-3
375 5 00yl0-12 3Jahn3 MP Cycle Control
37-11, 12-6 37-55 00,10-12 Hold
37=13 1-4 37-11,12-6 37-1, «0,26-(4,6 or 12)
37-16-3 | 37-13, Ly -4
370175 0092-2 37-16-3
37-25 ,26~h, 37=23 ,2h-6

37-25, 26=l,

OLP

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 5 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CO=26 (2~1 1/3) |
39=-2—12

CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
38-393

14-1-3 NC
8-1-1 NC

Uy-1-4 NC
CC-57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D6
41-2—1

ald, NC
CC-57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D-6
W41—2=1

CC~61 (12-0)

CC-80

(1/16 12-9)
Ta1yeey9-2 NC
3—11

CC=54 (12—12 1/2)

MP-DIV Control
Pick Up
13~1-(6)

Sequence
Counter Magnet

Intermediate
Reset
52-1,2,3-(12)

Intermediate
Reset
HD=4—(12)

Cycle Counter
Magnet

CC-k7 (3 1/2-16)
13-16

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP-31~32-33
52-3-11

CC-43 (12-0)
ABP=31=32~33
52_3—_11

+ CC-26 (2-1 1/3)
a=

oneal

(C47 (3 1/2-16)

t

+ CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
~~ EL

13-1-6

; rr

—38-3-3

= MD-34
MP-DIV Control Pick Up
13-1-(6)

1-1-3
84-1—1
- MD-13
equénhce Counter Magnet

CC-57 (12 1/2=13 2/3)

; 07329°3°,°5° é 1° _yiezat
CC=43 (12-0 Seq Ctr RO De 4 ~ MD-43
ooecrll pO artaiieatate Reset
ABP=31=32=33 ry 52-1,2,3~(12)

tolhnlel
aa J CC=57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)

ro

he? fl-21 (12-0)

Seq Ctr RO D- $__6C+61 (12-0
|cc-43 (12-0)

52=3011

0,9,0,0,0

O123 45

ABP=31=32-33

+.cte60 (1/16 12-9)
olzis ge 9902
‘ t oi3

- MD-46
Intermediate Reset
ry . HD-4-(12)

ol~1

CC=54 (12-12 1/2)
° 4 Q-~—~= MD-13

Cycle Counter Magnet

LLb
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 5 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
69-2~1,2 NC DIV Control [l2-1,2-2 NC or +,69-2-1
13-1-3 Hold 0-32 (8 1/2-2) 13-1-3
CC-58 14~1=(12) and 9-2-2 Te C0R58 (1-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) UW-1-11 | deein2 13-1-2
13=1-2 é. - MD-34,
2—2 - MP-DIV Control Hold
(ec=32 T 22 12-2) __ ded Ly-1-(12)
a
69~2~01,2 NC Column Shift sC=36 (12-0)
3-1-3 Right ABP..27 131-3
cC-58 29-1, «0 536= 29=3n-6 @___cC=58 (14-15 1/3)
(aeas 1/3) (12,12,6) 19-1-1 eid
9-1-1, oe
181-1 NC , 3@-1-1,..,
Cycle Ctr RO A~ Ba2—L 37-1l~l,es
38-1-1,.., 0°1°2°37 12 57.6°:7°8°S? q_37-U2
38-2-1 C=36 (12-0) Cycle Ctr RO A-L A. > MD-35
37—L=I. ee “wy a ob q
Bahn? Mipeo7 SSA UL
Column Shift Right
29-1, «+ 36~(12,12,6)
69-2~1,2 NC Colum Shift  |CC=36 (12-0)
==. Left ABP..27 pp — etic
cc-59 21-1, 20,339 21-3n-6 a cC-59 (14-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) (12,12,6 3823-6
38-3-6 A i8-1-2
MB-1-2 NC 1 282-2 yas
Cye e Ctr RO CH =1 3715-1 ce
382-2, o0, 07392791, 6 O40 oO _ 2° ,
38~3-1 C36 (12-0) Cycle Ctr RO C-1 ro MD-35
37=1L51,» 6 : _. - -
37=26-2 ro a a
Column Shift Left
ec=78 (15-16) Times Right cc-36 (12-0) + 00-78 (15-16)
29—-3n=5 5-1, 00527- ABP.-27 29=3n-5
MP Ctr RO (12,12,4) 5-3n=k ry
2nd midg
(odd colunn) 0 12°31" 567390 = MD-32
[oc~36 (12-0) MP Ctr RO 2nd mldg 2 —aiase Right

Lp 957

Sealy eoy27~(12,12,4)

BLP

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 5 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram -
cc-78 (15-16) Times Left {cc=56 (12-0) +.C0C-78 (15-16)
21-3n-5 bmL ye og2lm ABP=27 —3n-5
pe cer RO (12,12,4) m3 rh, t
& .
(even column) 07172937 5°6T 78S Qn MD=32
ecn3é (12-0) MP Ctr RO 2nd midg imes Left
ABP=27 ry
CYCLE 6

The intermediate counter resets as in cycle 3. Sign Control #1 drops out. If a nine stood in the 24th column of the intermediate counter
a nine is read into the 47th column of the PQ counter as in cycle 3. The MC miltiple selected by the times right relay is added into the
PQ counter. The PQ carry control and PQ carry relays are picked up and the carry impulse completes the entry into the PQ counter, The MO
miltiple selected by the times left relay is added into the DD counter. The DD carry control and the DD carry relays are picked up and
the carry impulse completes the entry into the DD counter. The cycle counter is advanced. As in cycle 5 the column shift left and right
and times left and right relays are picked up. The MC miltiples continue to be added in this manner in each successive cycle. When the
cyele counter reaches read-out position 9, the E relay is picked up. If MP was zero, this cycle (6) combines with cycle (6 +n). The first
DD-PQ transfer takes place and the relays terminating the mltiplication process are picked up as in cycle (6 +n). Here n indicates the
number of non-zero digits in the odd or even columns of the MP whichever is the greater.

Magnet 9 0 9

41 Multiply #1
38 Multiply #2 =
70 Sign Control #1 =
71 Sign Control #2
PQ 47th column Counter Magnet a
52 Intermediate Reset
HD-4 Intermediate Reset
Intermediate Counter Magnets SER aeae
37 MP Cycle Control .
 MP=DIV Control
21 Column Shift Left
29 Column Shift Right
4 Times Left
5 Times Right
PQ Counter Magnets f ee |
24 PQ Carry Control :
62 PQ Carry
DD Counter Magnets BeER Eee
27 DD Carry Control I
61 DD Carry
Cycle Counter Magnet

17 E =

=

6LP
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 6 -contimued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC=1, 0059 PQ Counter + OCA, 0059
HD=2+1, 20,10 NC Magnets = _ 2-1, 00,10

HD=5-1, oe 9 NC

MC-DR RO

Balell yoo 5-26-12

3019-1 NC prey
3~20~12 NC

29-1-1 goog
29-36-12

56—3-] NC ges
56-6-9 NC

CCmky (2-1 1/3)
5-3n-1
38-37

CCH=45
(1/16 11-13)
2hele1

CCm1,y 059
HD=2=1, 20510 NC
HD~5e1, 0059
MC-DR RO
helel, oo 94-26-12
56-l-1 Ny eey
56a2~12 NC
2i-l-1,..;
21-36-12
Ba2]ml NC, oo,
3=2h—9 NC

CC=44(2=1 1/3)
hn 3rie 1
58-348

CCO=45
(1/16 11-13)
27al-1

PQ Carry Control
2h=1-(4)

PQ Carry ;
62~1, «2 54—(12)

DD Counter
Magnets

DD Ca Control
27-1-(49

DD Carry
61-1, oe y4~(12)

CO-46 (2-13 1/3)
ABP~35
21h,

CC=46(2-13 1/3)
ABP=35
27al-h

— Lycos?

5el-l, soy
0°1°2° eshte 7°89 padbehs”” 3-19-1,o0,

MC-DR_RO 20-12  29=1-lyee,
L_gegey (eee 8
oho’ 4
-,Mij-11,12 J
Counter Magnets

——__—»—.

“Hee (2-1 1/3)

v3 at a uD~35
EL ago os Carry Control 24-1-(4)
+ CC-45 (1/16 11-13)
A Hh 5
+ CcC-1 0099
TET pp-2-1,..,10
pieese?
0.0,0,5 0.0 ee Oa
0123 678 9° bs: eS” 5belelyee
MC-DR_ RO 37°?
| acon?

6—2—-12 2lel-1,..,
nan meee eee

eG
L_ 3a QF MD--9,10
DD 2 antor "Magnets

+ a (201 me
ree KC=h6 (2-13 aa 38-3-8

Bici=h Qe MD-35
EL ty t—- [DD carry Control 27-1-(4)
+ CCHhs, (1/16 11-13)

“Ef — Zlnked

t. .0 = Yydel5

08F

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 6 -contined-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC~12 PQ Counter PQ Carry PQ Carry PQ Counter
(1212 1/2) Magnets + CC-12 (12-12 1/2) Contacts Relay Magnets
Carry BP
PQ Counter Carry BP| col, 1 96, QL col. 1
Carry Contacts ; |.__ 2.08
rane &
hd 2-1-1
Carry Booster- col. 2 96 4 As
9-2 3 | ee (0) 7 col. 2
Carry Booster=
10-2 ,3 62=1-12
Carry Booster- col.13 96 | 4 2
11-2,3 10¢ col.13
pbooster-9-2 |
Booster=9=3
r) Carry Booster-9-(4)
eer
col.l, 9 9 + Q4
10¢ col.ly

62-2-9
col.22 96, ery

10 | 69-1-2
t_._LOF 2
68-1
+4

+.C0=25 (3-14)
a) A
alae1-9
902 2-10
¢c01.23 9¢6 4
| 109
62aln8
col.h5 96. a
1094
62=h-9
col.46 965 4
109

Carry Booster-10 lies between columns 24 and 25,
Carry Booster-11 lies between columns 36 and 37.

as

col.45

MD-12
col.46

87

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 6 -continued-

SF

(12-12 1/2)

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit
CC-12 DD Counter DD Carry DD Carry
(12-12 1/2) Magnets + CC-12 (12-12 1/2)Contacts Relay
Carry BP 6 61-1-1
DD Counter Carry BP yeol. 1 98 o ry 60-2=2
Carry Contacts L. 10? t Q col. 1
ol gees pol-1-2 4
had vol. 2 98 ry ~— 809 “2
60=2 0023-2 NC ia 109 col. 2
Carry Booster- F pol=2-1 60
203 eol.13 99 4 0m 12
Carry Booster- L 109 col.13
7-253 _,Booster-6=2
Carry Booster— 4 __ | Booster-6-(4)
8-2, Booster-6-3 Q 7
é Lob? | 60-152
cole, 9. o-— t, | 60-15~
a 10¢ t_. Q_ fool.
p61-2-10
601.22 946 r 023-2
a 109 col ,22
im | pOl-2-11
col.23 96 ry Q col .23
L. 109
1.24 96 }_ofednl? 2.
ool. 9 0 4. col.
a 109 w2 ~ MD-9
61~4-8
coli 96 9. & Q,cOLelh
| 109 ;
1-4-9
col.45 9 ° t Q_JeokeA5
L. 109 ~ MD-10
Carry Booster~7 lies between columns 24 and 25,
Carry Booster-8 lies between columns 36 and 37.
CC+80 Cycle Counter + CC=80 (1/16 12-9)
(1/16 12-9) Magnet = Tay 00992
Tals oey92 NC Uyrl5
Wy-1-5 co-54 (12-12 1/2)
CC~54, =| 0 =, MD-13

yele Counter Magnet

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 6 ~continued-

Cycle Counter
Carry Contact

ABP=27

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram

69-2—1,2 NC E Relay CC=36 (12-0)

Uj-1-1 17-1-(4) ABP-27 1/3)

CC-58 17-1-4, ~1-1

(14-15 1/3) 18-1-1 Cycle Ctr 9's
19@1-1 NC Carry Contact
18~1-1 NC

9 My 3h
10¢ E Relay
; Ere,

The selected multiples are added into PQ and DD. 7
If the E relay was picked up in the previous eyel

e, the F rela

CYCLE 7 (4 + n)

and D, The cycle counter is advanced as in the previous cycle,

Magnet

ie)

Xe)

4l Multiply 41
38 Multiply #2
71 Sign Control #2
37 MP Cycle Control
14 MP=DIV Control
21 Column Shift Left
29 Column Shift Right
4, Times Left
5 Times Right
PQ Counter Magnets
24 PQ Carry Control
62 PQ Carry
DD Counter Magnets
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry
17 E
16 F
Cycle Counter Magnet

BH

'

he appropriate column shift left and right and times left and right relays are picked up.
y is now picked up altering the read-outs of the cycle counter to read-outs B

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
69=-281,2 NC F Relay 12-1,2-2 NC or | + 69=2-1 y-l-1 CC~79 (6-5 1/2)
eled 2) 1é—1-(4) CC~32 (& 1/2=2) r 4 H =
CC=79 (6-5 1/2 and 2-2 12-1-2 4 l7e1-1
38-3-5 181-4 = ,MD-34
171-1 222-2
ol8-1-4 F Relay
CC-32 (8 172-2) 4 18=1-(4)

Sep

The successive multiples of MC are added to DD and PQ.

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE & (5 + n)

used, the C2, D2 and DD-PQ transfer #] relaya are energized.

The cycle counter is advanced.

Magnet

18 F

21 Column
29 Column
4, Times Left
5 Timee Right

PQ Counter Magnets
24 PQ Carry Control
62 PQ Carry

DD Counter Magnets
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry

Cycle Counter Magnet

41 Multiply #1

38 Multiply #2

71 Sign Control #2
37 MP Cycle Control
U, MP-DIV Control

Shift Left
Shift Right

When all the significant figures in MP have been

P8F

66 C2 =
67 D2 im
74 DD-PQ Transfer #1
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
69-2-1,2 NC C2 69-1-3 NC or “2-1 UWjnl- 59 (UW-15 1/3)
ye Le1 / jor c0-30 (1/16 3-1) ws
CC~59 (14-15 1/3 and ee)
38~3-6 66-1-L, | tolfay? :
a-1-2 NC 38-2-2,..
Cycle Ctr RO 0° 1° 2°3°1,° vert 6° =e
3B =—2—2, 609 38~3-1 7 Cycle Counter RO = 26—2
37m 2b—d NC C=30 (1/16 3-1) ~]-10 C2 66-1~(4)
30~1-10 NC Ci bbl 38
t At)
[69~2=1,2 NC D2 69-1-3 NC or $.69-2-1 lyeled 00-58 (14-15 1/3)
Lyn1-1 67-1~(4) CC-30 (1/16 3-1) t +1 ,19-1-1
cc-58 (14-25 1/3) Jancl 18-1-1
19+1-1 NC 67—-1-4 ee BB-LnLyees
8-1-1 NC Qn
cycle Ctr RO - 071929374" 5°67 BO 9° a Ly-2
SBmLHL, oy 38e2—1 (1/16 3~1) , Cycle Counter RO 11-10 D2 67-1-(4)
371-2 NC bTolet _~ 0 2-38
31-110 NC 7 nae

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 8 (5 + n) ~continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC-40 DD-PQ CC-43 (12-0) + 00-40 (1/16 15-9)

(1/16 15-9) Transfer #1 =| ABP~31-32-33 66-1-1

66~1-1 Thal ,2-(12) Th 3—h ~ 4 67-1-1

67-1-1 The 3~(4) CC-43 (12-0) \D-38
KW . 6 Tha 3—h, DD-PQ Transfer #1
ABP=31=32=33 Thnl ,2-(12)
Th-3=(1)

CYCLE 9 (6 +n)

The first DD-PQ transfer takes place, Columns 1-22 of DD are added to columns 1-22 of PQ. The usual carry circuits are set up in the PQ
counter, The CD control relay picks up which permits the C and D relays to be energized. Picking up C and D drops out the MP cyele control
hold relays. The cycle counter is advanced. The energized C and D relays permit DD-PQ transfer #2, MP reset and MC-DR reset to be picked
up. The MC-DR entry control relays are picked up. The pick up of MC-DR reset drops out sign control #2, If MP was zero, this cycle com
bines with cycle 6.

Magnet 9 , 0 9

Al Multiply #1

38 Multiply #2

71 Sign Control #2

37 MP Cycle Control

14 MP~DIV Control

18 F .

7h DD-PQ Transfer #1
PQ Counter Magnets _ e a if a

24 PQ Carry Control

62 PQ Carry

66 C2

67 D2

69 CD Control =

30 ¢

31D
Cycle Counter Magnet f

59 DD-PQ Transfer #2

40 MP Reset

47 MC-DR Reset

HD=5 MC-DR Reset

91 MC-DR Entry Control ears

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)

a

S8P
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 9 (6 + n) -contimed-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC#1, 0059 PQ Counter + CO=1, 059
HD=t1,.2,10 NC | Magnets ET ___HD~e1, +410
HD=6=1,.049 NC a Ser
DD Counter RO .
Thel=l, ees Thelnl, es
ye210 P32 2°39),08Go7 a2 Tya2=10
‘ DD Counter RO 0 pee ND 11,12
, PQ Counter Magnets
Cons (2-1 1/3) | PQ Carry COH46 (2-13 1/2)]+ CCmks (2-1 1/3)
Nh=3= Contro ABP=35 = olke3—1
2hel-(h) 2h=1=4 — = MD=35
" |cc46 (2-13 1/2) nen ets Control
2hel=t 2h-1le(4,
BESS
CC+26 (2-1 1/3) | CD Control C-47 (3 1/2=16)) + cona6 (21 1/3)
Thed=L1. 69-1, 2-(4) 69~1-4, _ie2ol
| GB 2-16) Qos CoHtrol
fog 1 _b9rd-b 69-1,2-(4)
cC=33 C Relay G0~38 (11 1/2-9)}+ cC-33 (14-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) 30-1-(12) 30-1-11 H. 691-1
69-1-1 D Relay | j Cc Relay 30-1~(12)
31-1-(12) 31-1-11 cc-38 (11 1/2-9) qjori-i1
—~ a WD~35
31-1-11 D Relay 31-1-(12)
; t.
CC-40 (1/16 15-9]DD-PQ Transfer | CC-43 (12-0) + CC=40 (1/16 15-9)
-l- 59a], 2— 5 “ -l-'
59-3-(6) |oc-43 (12-0) Dae tD~39
“EL opp aoaOag DD-~PQ Transfer #2
. DS DE, 59-by9(2)
5 Jon Zane
CC-40 (1/16 15-9) uP Reset (2) Conus (12-0) + CC-40 (1/16 15-9)
30-1-3 40~: - BP=31-32~! “AH 80223
31-1-3 2 0-312 + 3le1-3
[eo-43 (12-0) 4 =) MD~37
0=-3=12 “~ MP Reset
“ABP S10 52053 4 40-1, 2,3-(12)

987

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 9 (6 + n) -continued~

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC-40 (1/16 15-9)MC-DR Reset CO43 (12-0) +.CC-40 (1/16 15-9)
3 A7=1,.6,13-(12) JABP=31-32-33 0-1-3
-l- 47~-13=10,11,12 4__31-1-3
h1-2-4 on |cc-43 (12-0) t_agileoch
EL OO One H#7213-10, 11,1 t 0 = yp-42
ABP=31=32=33 4 , MC~DR Reset
ATn1, «+ 513=(12)
CC-40 (1/16 15~9JMC~DR Reset CC-43 (12-0) + CC-40 (1/16 15-9)
30-1-3 HD-5=(12) ABP~3]-32-33 “TET 3071-3
31-1-3 47-13-10 11,12 w &___ 31-1-3
1-2-1, ce=63 (12-05 4 __bl-2-1
CC-63 (12-0) lcGea43 (12-0) @___CC~63 (12-0)
4 5 —-0—-0-——otZ=13-10,11,12 H Qe D-H6
ABP=31=32-33 t MC-DR Reset
HD=-5-(12)
CC~76 DMC-DR Entry cc-77 (16-0) + CO=76 (15-16 1/3
(15-16 1/3) Control (1-2) TET 3) 3-2
—_ 91-1,2,3-(12) [913-12
CC~77 (16-0) 91-3- C-DR Entry Control (1-2)
Jn13~3 MC-DR Entry “ET ory 91-1,2,3-(12)
Control (3-6) 47-13 =3
92~1,2,3-(12) 92-312 ry
92-3~12 MC=-DR Entry Control (3-6)
L713 4, IMC~DR Entry ry 92-1,2,3-(12)
Centrol (4-8) 47-13 =k,
93-1,2,3~(12) 93=3-12 ry ~ MD~32 (
93-3-12 -DE Entry Control (4-8)
ee __ 93-1,2,3~(12)

CYCLE 10 (7 +n) .

The second DD to PQ transfer, adding columns 23-45 of DD to columns 23-45 of PQ takes place. The usual carry circuits are set up in the PQ
counter, The MC-DR, MP and cycle counters reset. The A relay is picked up, and the B relay also if PQ 47th column nines carry contact is
closed, Energizing of the A relay will cause the MP-DIV control relay to drop out and prevent further advance of the cycle counter. The
sequence counter advances to read-out position 7. In preparation for the next cycle, the product out and sequence counter reset relays are
picked up. If the B relay is energized, the PQ invert relay is picked up. Asswming the product is to be delivered to storage counter 40,
code 64, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (blank, 64, 7). The sequence relays are picked up. The repeat relay and the
storage counter in relays are energized,

L8P
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 0 (7 + n) -continued-

ae ee

Magnet

9

41 Multiply #1

38 Multiply #2

59 DD=PQ Transfer #2
PQ Counter Magnets

24 PQ Carry Control

62 PQ Carry

L7 MC-DR Reset

HD=5 MC-DR Reset

91 MC~DR Entry Control (1-2)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2)

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC=-DR Counter Magnets (3-6)

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (4~8)
MC=DR Counter Magnets (5)
MC=DR Counter Magnets (7)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)

40 MP Reset
MP Counter Magnets

14 MP=DIV Control
Cycle Counter Magnet

18 F

1A

16 B
Sequence Counter Magnet

3h Product Out

48 Sequence Counter Reset

HD~3 DD-PQ Invert

Seq-31 Control

Seq~B-6-].

Seq-B-4-].,2

Seq-C=7-1.

Seq-27 Repeat

SC40-4,5,6 Storage Counter In

BECaz=z

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
COm1L 0059 PQ Counter + CCH1,.459
HD-3-1,..,10 NC | Magnets SET ppn3-1,..,

HD-be1, 20,9 NO

DD Counter RO

59~L=1, aay
592-11

10
D-6-1, 66,9

an well

59m1-1, 00,
2-1)

- MD-11,12
2 PQ Count er

Magnets

2,0,0,0,8,0,0,0,0

0°17 2°39 4° 516-798
DD Counter RO

887
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 10 (7 4 n) -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CO-A4 (2-1 1/3) ]PQ Carry CO=46 (2-13 1/3)] + CCHA4 (2-1 1/3)
59~3-1 Gongrot ABP~35 = 3—1 0-3
2h-1- -1 e. Qn 5
Panik |eC-46 (2-13 1/3) PQ C Control
=| 6 Ah-1-h, 2hm~1-(
=35 4__,_J
CO-1,.+59  -  |MC-DR Counter + CO-1, 4459
MC-DR RO
Fy 2 Eo 47-1-1,..
APm12-12 orate pee? YJW12—12°
MC=-DR Counter 4 Q —~_3 MD-2,.2,57
MC-DR Counter Magnets
CCm1, 2059 MP Counter + Om) 099
401-1, 2059 Magnets =| hOnr}~1,..59
MP Counter RO ry
L0W2—1,.. 40-2~1,..
4O-3-11. 0P3°2°P1,25°6? Fag? 40-3-11
MP Counter RO 4 0 __ =~ MD-8
; counter Magnets
COm1y 0059 Cycle Counter + CO-1, 2459
Cycle Counter RO| Magnet 472-12
59~3-3 or ,
47-2-12 Predyoye 526978099 bate
Cycle Counter RO-E ~ ,MD~13
Cycle Counter Magnet
69~2-1,2 NC A ne ) oo-29 (6-8) +, 69-201
-1+1 12-1, 2=(4 lah, Ayn1-1
cc-60 (6-5 1/3) CC-60 (6=5 1/3)
59a3"2 8) = 932 uD-34,,35
— a, ”
2-1-1, a Relay
ry 12-1, 2-(4)
69-2—1,2 NC 1B eed) co-29 (6-8) + 69=2—1
y—l-1 16-1-(4 16-1-1, jy-1-1
cc-60 (6-5 1/3) = 2—2 CC-60 (6-5 1/3)
ee ine : hod 8) , =| 9-3-2 PQ 47th col.
th column C~29 hd
9's carry = 6-1-4, “98 — MD-34
contact t 10¢ re B Relay 16-1-(4)

687

MULTIPLICATION

SYCLE 10 (7 + n) -contimed-

067

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CC=10 (0-0 1/2)
38-33

1b-1-3 NC
Bh-l-1 NC

lyel-4 NC
CC-57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D-7
41-23

and

41-2—6

UW-le4, NC
CC=55

(12 1/2+13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO Be7
1-2-2

cc-40

(1/16 15-9)
229-32 NC
6—1=1

FC=105 (4-2 1/2)
Seq Cut-off Sw,
Card Feed #1 Sw.
Card Feed #2 Sw.
BBP=64

121, 2=3

55-3—2 NC
78=2=-8 NC
81-2-9 NC
BBP=52, FEP=99
201-1-2 NC
FBP-98
Seq-32-1,2 NC

Sequence

Product Out
34-3-(12)

3h-1,2-(12)
3hmha(.)

Sequence
Counter Reset
1.8=1-(12)

DD-PQ Invert
HD-3-(12) and
HD-3-(4)we

Control
Seq-31-(4)
Clutch Magnet

Counter Magnet,

CO-43 (12-0)
ABP-31-32~-33
34~3=12

CC+43 (12-0)
ABP=31-32=-33
Bhebmd

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP-31-32--33
48~1-6

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP~31-32--33
HD-3=12

* CCH10 (0-0 1/2)

a

8-3-3
o 1-3
Shet-2
equence Counter Magnet

ola,

ee (12 1/2=13 2/3)

07192937" 56°78 h1-2-3 Product Out
CC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO D-7 r 202)”
3h-3—(12
*RBPORIS 32033
» MD=39 40
Ter uit)
3h-be( A)
te -1-4,
CO=55 (12 1/2=13 2/3)
kecen3 (12-0) 0°1°2°3°H,°5°6° He ~ 2-2 =, MD--1,2
eg Ctr RO B-7 48 aL 4 he Sequence Counter Reset.
BPOSIS 2233 ry —_FI 48-1~(12)
+ CCHL0 (1/16 15-9) .
kC-23 (12-0) ~~ “tgs 1-1
HD-3-12 4 we a
KEpOsIS2O35° 4 ; J-PQ Invert HD-3-(12), HD-3-(4)we

+ FCH105 (4-2 1/2)
~1-3

_
ss)

_/
eq.6w. C.F.41 Sw. C.F #2 Sw. BEPCOL

2-1-2 Seq-32-1

—— ne
=95 ; . Control Seq-31-(4)
Seq~32—2 ~ F~18
> Fel9
utch Magnet

BP=9

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 10 (7 + n) -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit . Circuit Diagram
FC-101 (3-2 1/2) FC+102 (4-9 3/h)] + FC-101 (3-2 1/2)
VBP~100 VBP~225 oO. Seq-31-1
Seq-31-1,..,4  |B-6-1-(6) B-6=1-6 @S__§-6-1-6 | B-6-1-(6)
Reading Pins a etey Bx-2~6 r
Bel-2= - F-17
C=7-1-(4) C-7o1-4 $2, B=h=2-% |_-B4-1-(12)
. 4 | B-4-2-(6) 4
~ Pel
4__| | 827 ase OR) eit
FC+102 (4-9 3/4) 4]
VBP=225
FC=107 (0-5 1/4)}Repeat Relay FC-107 (0-5 1/4) ] + FC-107 (0-5 1/4)
VBP-280 Seq-27-(4) VBP~280 C-7=1-1
C-J-1-1 Seq-27=4, 380 ~ F-18
. Sequ27=. Repeat
Seq-27=(4)
FC-93 Storage Counter |SC-11 (12-0) + FC-93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) | #40 In SCLO-6=L 7 Be8-1-
VBP-149 SChO~4,, 5~(12) =1L9 BeJ~1-1
Be8-1-1 NC SCL0-6—(4,) :
B-7-1-1 NC
Be6—1-1
B-5-1+2 NC
Beh-1-3
B-3-1-6 NC BC-11 (12-0)
Be2-1-11 NC “EF __$C40-6-4
B-1-2-9 NC ry
Storage Counter In
SCLO-4,, 5-(12)
SCLO0-6~(4,)

CYCLE 11 (8 +n)

The product is read from the PQ counter to storage. The storage counter carry is completed. The sequence counter and the 47th column of
PQ counter are reset. The repeat relay permits the energizing of the start relay, The calculator continues in operation.

_ 16F
MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 11 (8 + n) -continued~
Magnet 9 0 9
34 Preduct, Out
HD-3 DD-PQ Invert
veSterage Counter Yagnet 47

SCLO~$ Storage Counter Carry Control
SCLO-7,8 Storage Counter Carry
lA
16 B
48 Sequence Counter Reset
Sequence Counter Magnet
PQ 47th column Counter Magnet
Seq-27 Repeat
Seq-32 Start
Seq-3]. Control
Seq Relays

c6h

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CC~1, 0059
HD~3=1, «059 NC
HD-3-10
HD--6=1, 2059 NC
PQ Counter RO
Plug Wires
Bhn-l-1,.e,y
3h-2-1]
Buss
SCLO=4, 5-(12)

CO=5 (5-5 1/2)
Seq Ctr RO
BBP=4,3
782-10 NC
831-4. NC
80-1-1 NC
BBP=LL,
FBP-176
2381-2 NC
FRP=$177
BBP=4.5
82—1-4 NC
1 2—2—5 NC
55-2~9 NC
15-1-1 NC
48-1-2

Storage Counter
Magnet (cols.
1-23)

+ CC-1 99

Sequence Counter
Magnet

EY H-3-1,..,9
HDmberl, 2049
HD=3-J.0
tee
) 7° 2° 3 4° § 5 %% 5°6 97° 8% On eg

oP lug Bhel-1, sey

-2-11 SChO-h-1, ++,

PQ Counter r RO Wires t <0 8th: Sell
“Wy
Storage Counter Magnet
Columns 1-23
+ £0-5 (5-5 1/2)
o 7? ” 371° 5°6° 6 718 Oo r "18=2=10
Seq Ctr RO BBP=43 ff 831-4,
80-1-1
238-142
BEPS,, FBFCIT6
82-1-4
FBPCI7 BHPOLS 2m2—5
porerd

t torial
t ott8e1-2
4 9 ~ MD-13
Seq Ctr Magnet

MULTIPLICATION CYCLE 11 (8 + n) =contimed~

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

Co~9 (9-9 1/2)
HD~3=10

Col.46 zero
Col.47 zero or 8
HD-3=11

Col.47 9 spot
Plug Wires
3ha-2e12

Buss

SCLO~5—12

(CC=2 (2-2 1/2)
J1=1-3 NC

eC-1 (1-1 1/2)
7l=-1=-2 NC

PQ 47th column
RO
3h 3—9

Seq=27=1
VBP=276
FC=103 (6-5 1/2)
VEBP=277

Seq-27-2

FC-105 (4=2 1/2)

Sequence Cut-off
Switch

ard Feed #1 Sw.
ard Feed #2 Sw,

BBP-64,

Seq~33—1

Seq-32-1,2 NC

Read 9 from 47th
col. of FQ to
24th col, of
storage counter

PQ 47th column
Counter Magnet

Start
Seq-33-(4)

Control
Seq-31-(4)

FC#108 (6-2 1/2)
VBP-278
Seq-33-4

+ CO-9 (9-9 1/2)

=1
10

0,,0,,0,0 ,0

col.h6 [0 593079379719

§ 0.0,0,0,0,0,.8 o & Plug

cole4? = O516273 849

” Wires

+ CC-2 (2-2 1/2)
TE. N-1-3

p—
(71-1-2

fec-1 (1-2 1/2)
a=

a t

0759196 02793

2-12

co.
+ Oo fCh0-5~12

Storage Ctr Magnet
1. 2k,

Buss ry Qe f-

ohn3-9

PQ 47th colum

+ Seq-27-1

”_ FC=103 (6-5 1/2)
108 (6-2 1/2) oa oes are
7 Oo
Be4r33-4
VEROS78 4
+ FC-105 (4-2 1/2)
| /.

f
‘Seq.Sw. C.F.#1 Sw. C.F.#2 Sw.

BBP=64,

o-—oseae33=1

fe W-12

PQ 47th column
Counter Magnet

Q = F-18
Sta

Seq-33-(4)

=32-1
-, F-18

3 2—2 Control

Seq-31-(4) ;

E6P

READ-OUT of PG LOW-ORDER COLUMNS

F6P

CYCIE 11 (6 +n). Assuming that the ‘Low order columns of tha product are to be delivered to storage counter 3 » code 21, the sequence me~

chanism reads the line of coding (66, 21, 7).
storage counter in relay are energized.

CYCLE 12 (9 +n).

energizing of the start relay. The calculator contimes in operation,

The sequence relays are picked up.
If the B relay is energized, the special sign ralay and the DD-PQ invert relay are picked up.

The special PQ out relay,

Magnet 9 Cycle 11 9 Cycle 12 9
Sequence Relays ]
100-1 Special Sign
99-1,2,3 Special PQ Out a
HD=3, HD-3 we DD-PQ Invert
Storage Counter Magnets FURR eee jt
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC~92 99-1,2=(12) | CC=43 (22-0) | + FO~92 (12 1/2-13 2/3) .
(12 1/2-13 2/3) | 99-3-(4) ABP-~31+32~33 = ogi8-1-1
VBP-150 Special PQ Out |99-3-4 VBP=-150 4____ A-7=1-2
A~8-1-1 (col.1-23) é t_A
AnJo1e2 NC
Ae6-1-3
A=5=1=6 NC
Awk<Le11 NC
A~3-2=9 NC \ec-43 (12-0)
An2ah-5 NC _ .
AwL=7-9 NC RBPOFLL32233
CC=40 100-1-(4) CC=17(3 1/216) | +,CC-40 (1/16 15-9) 29~3~-2
(1/16 15-9) Special Sign 100--1-4 g=l Jb-1-1
229-32 NC coud (3°1/2-16) a. : =, MD=i,7
16-1-1 _ghO0~1=4, Special Sign
4 100-1-(45
CC~33 HD-3~(12) CC-1,3 (12-0) ae (u-15 1/3) panda
(14-15 1/3) HD-3-(4) we ABP--31=32~33 ry 200-1-1 DD-PQ Invert
99-3-1,2 DD-PQ Invert HD=!j=12 9923-2 ry ~ MD~h6
100~1--1,2 \cc-43 (12-0) | 00-1-2° HD-3= 22)
HD-3-12 l HD~3=(4,) we
ABPS31°32°33 ‘
CC=-9 (9-9 1/2) | Str Ctr Magnet + 66-9 (S=9 1/2)
HD=3=1 we 24th col. AD-3=1 we Str Ctr Magnet
99=2-1.2 ry 99=2~12 24th column
Buss ry S03-5-12
SC3~5=12 Bisa’ Qn PRs

the repeat relay and the

The storage counter magnets are energized and the storage counter carry circuits completed, The repeat relay permits the
READ-OUT of PQ LOW-ORDER COLUMNS -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit

CC=1, 0059 Str Ctr Magnets
HD-3=1,..,10 NC |cols,1-23
HD-6-1,..,9 NC
PQ Ctr RO (1-23)

991-1, 0, 0.0.0.0 Pr taly sey Str Ctr Magnets
99~2-11 g 2-11 SC3-h-1, os, cols.1-23
SC3—hml,. wy PQ Ctr RO cols.1-23 4 o-803=-5-11
803-511 Buss #_ OA An Poa

NORMALIZING REGISTER

The function of the normalizing register is discussed on pages 23-4. The special coding required for its operation is given on pages 159-61.
This coding assumes that: (1) the quantity to be normalized lies in storage counter A; (2) the constant K lies in switch SC; *t3) storage
counters B, C, D and E are reset,

CYCLE 0. The sequence mechanism reada the line of coding (A, 761, 7), and steps to the next line. The sequence, storage counter and mltiply
circuits are completed as in mltiplication cycle 0,

CYCLE 1. The operations of mltiplication cycle 1 are carried out, The sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (SC, B, 7), and steps to
the next line, The sequence, switch SC out and storage counter B in relays are energized,

CYCLE 2. The operations of multiplication cycle 2 are carried out, The quantity in switch SC is read into storage counter B. The sequence
mechanism reads the line of coding (A, 8321, blank), and steps to the next line, The Sequence and normalizing register read-in relays are
energized. ;

CYCLE 3, The operations of multiplication cycle 3 are carried out. The digit sensing and shift positioning relays are picked up. The se-
quence mechaniam reads the line of coding (blank, E, 7), and steps to the next line. The sequence and storage counter E in relays are ener=
gized.

Magnet 9 Cycle 2 g Cycle 3 9

Sequence Relays ; |
101-1,2 Normalizing Register Read-in
102-1,..,23 Digit Sensing ;
103-1,..,23 Shift Positioning | a ia a

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram

+

FC-93 101-1,2-(12) CC-43 (12-0) FC~93 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |Norm. Reg. ABP--31-32=33 fameence
VBP=$149 Read-in 101-2-12 ae

B-8~1-1

B-7=1-2 NC

Normalizing Register In
B-6-1-3 NC -1-9 101-1,2-(12)
Boin1a9 NC aire
m1 B-2-3-10
B=3-2-5 CC-43 (12-0) — & Be] 6-8 MD-4,7
B-2-3-10 . 101~2-12 ;
B-1-6-8 ABP=31=32=33 a

S6P

NORMALIZING REGISTER -continued-

967

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

SC-1, 2659

Str Ctr Reset NC

Str Counter
Invert=-NC

Str Ctr BP

Str Ctr RO col.n

SCA=1-1, 20,
SCA=2-11

Buss

-lLOl-le1,..,

101-2-11

102-1, ..523=(4)
Digit Sensing

CO=-35 (9-12)
ABP+21
102—n=4,

CC-37
(11-1/4. 12)
102=23,.+,1-1.

103-23,..,1-(4) J4d-1-1 NC

or

CC-52(1/3 3-16)
and

103-23, 2+,1-4

wk, =, oy?
te Ctr Reset

tr Ctr Invert

o~ 102-n--(4,)
Str Ctr SCA~1-1,.. 1s n 523
BP 0210293456072? SCAn2-11 |” 101~1-1,..,
Storage Counter RO Ql-2-11
cc~35 (9-12) column n Buss 5 MD-47
TE ~O- _l02=n=4,
ABP=21 ,
+. 00-37 (11-1/h 12) .102+23-1 _—~> MD-47
TE oe 03-231, Ly Shift Positioning
_ 103=23,.+,1=(4)
QU
03=22-4,
1
Je-2-1 =k
. t
CG-52 (1/3 3-16) ma 03-11, D-
FY ¢

Digit Sensing

CYCLE 4. The power of ten selected by the digit sensing and shift positioning relays is read into th
counter E, The operations of multiplication cycle 4 are carried out.

The sequence mechanism reads

steps to the next line. The normalizing register read-out relay and storage counter C in relay are energized.

CYCIE 5, The operations of miltiplication cycle 5 are completed, The amount of shift is read into storage counter C.

e intermediate counter and into storage
the line of coding (8321, C,

7), and

Magnet 9 Cycle 4 9 Cycle 5 9
103-1,..,23 Shift Positioning
Intermediate Counter Magnet
104-1 Normalizing Register Read-Out
Storage Counter Magnets he f le

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CC-1 (1-1 1/2) [intermediate Ctr

6—5=2 lagnet
103-(n)=-1 col, (24=n)
Buss

5Oml~1, «,50-2-12

Buss:

-] (1+1 1/2)
afb 522 (nda 50-1) .+

Intermediate Ctr Magnet
column (2h-n)

NORMALIZING REGISTER -continued-

103-32
¢

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC-92 1O4-1~(4.) CC-43 (12-0) + FC~92 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |Norm. Reg. ABP~31-32-33 7 8-1-1
VBP-150 Read-out LOL-1-1, VBP=150
A-8-1~1
jA~7=l=2 NC Normalizing Register Out
A-6—1~3 NC 104~1~(4)
eheda9 Ne ae eeet
whl -2~3=10
A=3=2=5 CC=43 (12-0) ry Awl-6-8 MD=4.7
A-2=3-10 104-1-4, s
A-1-6-8 One x tiv
oimariad 3 Buss col.s.20 + CC-3 (3-3 1/2) ;
-n=2 or and 2 “TH 03=23=3
QOk-l=1 or 2 aa ry 0bmL=1
[CC-2 (2-2 1/2) 1.03-23=2 Buss col.20
t saan Bu: 1.21
FA ss col,
ec-1 (1-1 1/2) +0
=F 03-223
poacseré
103=21-2
+
f03-14-3
0 4 +4
sine .
103-133

103-12-3

03a

&

103-11-2

a,
gi3-h=3

ae

L6F
NORMALIZING REGISTER ~continued=
CYCLE 6. The operations of multiplication cycles 6 and 8 (5 + n) are carried out.

CYCIE 7. The operations of miltipiication cycle 9 (6 +n) are carried out. The sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (C, B, 32), and
steps to the next line, The sequence relays, storage counter ¢ out relay, storage counter B in relay and the storage counter invert relay
are picked up.

CYCLE 8. The operations of mitiplication cycle 10 (7 +n) are carried out, The nines complement of the amount of shift is read from stor-
age counter C to storage counter B completing the computation of the exponent. The sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (blank,
blank, 7), and steps to the next line. The sequence relays are picked up.

CYCLE 9. Except for the pick up of the storage counter in relay, the operations of miltiplication cycle 11 (8 + n) are carried out. The
sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (86, D, 7), and steps to the next line. The sequence relays, the special PQ out relay and the
storage counter D in relay are energized.

CYCLE 10. The normalized quantity is read into storage counter D with its highest significant digit in the 23rd column. The repeat relay
permits the pick up of the start relay. The calculator continues in operation.

867
DIVISION CYCLE O

To start division, assuming the DR to lie in counter 8, code 4, the sequence mechanism reads the line of coding (4, 76, blank). As in mlti-
plication cycle 0, the sequence relays are picked up. The divide relay is picked up. The sequence counter advances to read-out position 1.
The storage counter out relays are picked up as in mltiplication cycle 0, The intermediate in and DD-PQ reset relays are picked up. The
heavy duty DD-PQ reset relay is energized as in mitiplication cycle 0.

Magnet 9 0 9

Seq~27 Repeat
Seq-33 Start ]
Seq-31 Control oo
SeqnA~h-1,2
Seq~Be7=1
Seq-B=6-1
56 Divide
Sequence Counter Magnet
SC81,2,3 Storage Counter Out
50 Intermediate In
58 DD-PQ Reset
HD=6 DD-PQ Reset

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
FC+95 (2-1 1/3) [Divide 48-11 NC or + FC-95 (2-1 1/3)
VBP-171 56-1,..,13-(12) |cc-52 (1/3 3-16) 8-1-2
BeSal-2 NO and VBP=171
Be7-1=3 CC~53 (11-16) or
Bebe -5 BBP-91 8-1-1
Be5—1-4 NC FBP=140 | ¢t
Bahwl-7 NC 199=-1-1 NC f
Be3—2=1 NC FBP=$197 ‘ cC=52 (1/3 3-16)
Be2=-3-1 NC BBP-132 EL
Bel-5<1 NC and ;
BBP~103 56-13-11 199=1l-1

BBPCOL FBPSI,0  F FBP-197 BBP=132 0

bed nd BBP™ 103
|cc-53 (11-16) 6-13-11 Qe Dah
=| ry Divide
56-1, +,13-(12)

CC-10 (0-0 1/2) |Sequence Counter + CC-10 (0-0 1/2)
56-13-1 Magnet WH 6-13-1

Ab-1-3 NC -1-3
@h-1-1 NC Shela
~ WD-13

Sequence Counter Magnet

667

DIVISION CYCLE O -contined-

00S

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Cireuit Diagram

U-1-4 NC
CC-55

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO Bel
56-11-1

Lym1-4, NC
CC-57

(12 1/2213 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D-1
56-112

CC=43 (12-0)
5B-B-12 .
58ahe ld 12
CC=62 (14-0)

Intermediate In
50~1,2,3-(12)

DD-PQ Reset
58-1, ..,8=(12)

DD-PQ Reset
HD-6=(12)

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP--31-32=33
50-33-11

CC=4,3 (12-0)
ABP.-31-32-33
58-8-12
58-1-11,12

aa=a (12 1/2-13 2/3)

(12-0)

or 2 (one) 0,,0,0,0
vibe? eee =

6°7°8°6? _S6=21=1

ABPS3IS3 2233

-1-4,
aa (12 1/2=13 2/3)

t_ Q _- MD=43
Intermediate In
50-3-11 50-1,2,3-(12)
et _,.___

0°192° Ey 1° 5° 6° 7°20 “i 5bel1-2

; Seq Ctr RO Del
(12-0)

ABPO31S3 2033
“43 (12-0)
05 sOx =B=12
ABP~31=32=33 t_.

=~ D-39
DD-PQ Reset
58-1, ..,8-(12)

(C62 (14-0)

on

- M16
DD-PQ’ Reset
HD-6-(12)

The DR is read from storage to the intermediate counter,
DR) picks up the intermediate 24th colum read~out control relay,
to read-out position 2,

DR is negative,

energized as in multiplication cycle 1,

DIVISION CYCLE 1

The entry of a nine into the 24th column of the intermediate counter (a negative
The DD, PQ and Q-shift counters reset.
In preparation for the next cycle the intermediate invert control and intermediate invert relays are picked up if
The shift pick up, shift and MO-DR in relays are picked up in order to read the DR from the intermediate counter to the

MC~-DR counters with its first significant digit in the 23rd column of MC-DR (1-2). The entry control relays on MC-DR (1-2) and

The sequence counter is advanced
DEVISION CYCLE 1 -continued-

Magnet 9 i?) 9

56 Divide
SC8-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
50 Intermediate In

Intermediate Counter Magnets Bee eee eee
89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control
58 DD=PQ Reset ]

HD-6 DD-~PQ Reset
PQ Counter Magnets
DD Counter Magnets
Q-Shift Counter Magnets
Sequence Counter Magnet a
22 Q-Shift Invert
94, Intermediate Invert Control
HD-1 Intermediate Invert
35 Shift Pick Up

a
36 Shift =
43 MC#DR In i
91 MC-DR Entry Control (1-2) \-=
92 NMC=-DR Entry Control (3-6
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit . Circuit Diagram
CO-1, 6059 Q-Shift Ctr + CCm1 6059 HD=6-1,..59 58- <0 il
ED=b-1, 0099 Magnets = as [orr2295° ufs04070q090 SE , rOeaanite cos Counter Magnets
Q~Shift RO Q-Shift Ctr RO
§8-8-10,11
+ di-1l-4, Intermediate Counter RO
14-1-4 NC Shift Pick Up CC-42 CO=55 (12 1/213 2/3) col.24 col.23 col. 2 col. 1
C055 35—1,.6,46-(4) | (12=1/3 16) 2nd moldings
(12 5/2013 2/3) 35-1, 66 hbk 0.0.4.0.0.0 7 4 I
Seq Ctr RO Be2 -0O212 be 56°78 79° pSr11-3 | 0 oo |
56~11-3 Seq Ctr RO B-2 Silo
Intermediate Ctr lilo 45 3
24th column 6 |) 0 5-45- | 35-3-h re
2nd mldg 0 to (ee (2-1/3 16) 2110 t ry
2nd midgs O's 7 fe}
or - 3110
24th column Billo Shift Pick Up in
2nd mldg 9 to 4 || o 3rd moldings B5mLy oo yhb=(4)
3rd mldgs 9's 9 lI} o-~o
jd §
op 5—h6=-h J35-h—k, 5a 2k,
4 2 MD~
‘ 40

LOS

DIVISION CYCLE 1 -contimed-

35~(2n-1L)—1 NC
35—(2n)\e1 NC

(C-43 (12-0)
° ‘BP=31 |

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
Wy-1-4, NC MC-DR In CC=-43 (12-0) lak,
CC-56 43-1, oe,10-(12) | ABP~31-32=33 @56 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) ]43-11,12-(4) 43-10-12
pict ied RO C-2 43-12-34 07172997 1,05 67°99?
43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO C-2 = al mR
- 43-1,4-,10-(12) MC-DR In
ABPO31C5 2033 "36
43-11=(4)
L-le-s, NC Q-Shift Invert [CC-43 (12-0) + U-l-h
CC-56 22-1-(12) ABP=-31-32-33 CC~56 (12 1/2~13 2/3)
(12 1/2613 2/3) 221-11
Seq Ctr RO C2
56-11-5 wiedoe Porras _porll-5
Seq Ctr C=2 t. Sees fs
(12-0) Q-Sh : invert
farl-11 22a1-(12

ABP231032033 t__._
Lyles, NC Intermediate cC=43 (12-0) + Welk
CC=57 Invert Control ABP-31-32-33 taal C0=57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |9b-1-(4) Qhni=4 . =a

. [Seq Chr RO D-2 0.0,.8.0,0 .0,0,,0,0,0
56-11--6 or1 ats 6° 7° 8° 9) pbrl-6
Seq Ctr RO D2 ria WO) pone 32 MDM 38
[ec-43 (12-0) Intermediate Invert Control
~ wl-k, helo (4,

. (BPOFISIZO3S ar’ _—_
co-33 Shift CO=43 (12-0) + C0=33 (1-15 1/3) 35-461 MD~4.1
(1-25 1/3) Bbm1, + 539- ABP--31 ] —WBe2-12 35-45) _s = 238,39-(12,12,4)
43-2-112 (4,6 or 12) B6-1—hy oes 4
35—(2n+1)<1 36-39-2

6-2-(6)

6=1-(4)
Shift

36-1, « + 739~(4,6 or 12)

c0S

DIVISION CYCLE 2
The sign control relays are picked up if the intermediate 24th column read-out control relay is up as in multiplication cycle 2. The posi-
tive absolute value of DR reads from the intermediate counter to MC-DR counters (1-2), (3-6), (5), (7) and (9). The positive absolute value
of DR is read through the shift relay so that its first significant digit lies in column 23 of MC-DR (1-2). The complement on nine of the
number of columns the DR is shifted left on reading into MC-DR (1-2) is read into the Q-shift counter, At carry time an elusive one is read
into the Q-shift counter. The sequence counter advances to read-out position 3. In preparation for the next cycle, the intermediate reset,
the first build-up and the first and second build-up relays are picked up. The entry control relays for wc~-pR(3-63 and (4-8) are energized
as in miltiplication cycle 2,

Magnet 9 fe) 9

56 Divide 1 A NO

89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control

70 Sign Control #1 {

71 Sign Control #2

94 Intermediate Invert Control

HD-1 Intermediate Invert

43 MC=DR In

36 Shift

91 MC-DR Entry Control (1-2)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2)

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (3~6)
MC~DR Counter Magnets (5)
MC~DR Counter Magnets {73
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9

22 Q-Shift Invert {_{

87 Q-Shift "Elusive One" Control }

88 Q-Shift "Elusive One" =
Q-Shift Counter Magnets en tt od!
Sequence Counter Magnet a

4h First Build Up

45 First and Second Build Up

52 Intermediate Reset

HD-, Intermediate Reset

92 MC=DR Entry Control (3-6) =a

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-3)

Pick Up Cirmit Magnet Hold Circuit ; Circuit Diagram
CC=10 (0-0 1/2) | Sequence Counter + CC-10 (0-0 1/2)

56-13-1 Magnet : 6~13-1

14-1-3 NC

8helel NC

- 30-130
equence Counter Magnet

G

DIVISION CYCLE 2 -contimed-

FOS

5611-9
6C-61. (12-0)

01.29 314° 5° 79899? 56-11-9

k ports (12-0)

Eps 2a2yg3

Oseq Ctr RO D-3
aN

t_.

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
ooo v/2) Q-Shift Ctr Q-Shift 88-1-1
12-12 1/2 Magnets Carry Contact ay
Oe ereet c ( p) col.l ps-1-1
ue tr + CC#12 (12-12 1/2 96 ae a col.l = MD-
Carry Contact ET ~ le” snire
88-1--1,2 Carry” BP _28-1=2 Counter
28~1+1 NC op. col.2 Magnets
88-1-2
en 9 Caines
a,
Lyall, NC First Bane Bs CC-43 (12-0) + Wel-i, / /3)
CC-55 Abnl,o+,5-(12) JABP-31-32-33 ~~ F__ 0C~55 (12 1/2-13 2/3
(12 1/2-13 2/3) _ hbyen5=11 -
Seq Ctr RO B-3
56-11-7 oer BP 4° 5°6P'7°8°9° _pboLle7
CC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO B=3 t - MD-42
_dicsat op Des puild 0
MBPLSILI33 OE bhel, oo, 5-(12
4-1-4 NC First and Second |CC--43 (12-0) + Uiel-d
CC~56 Build Up ABP~31-32-33 CC=56 (12 1/213 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |45<1,..,5= 2(12) 45-5-11
Seq Ctr RO C-3
56-11-8 (12-0) 0°1°2 0712°34,° 596979899 _ 56-11-8
cC~43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO C-3 ~ MD-42
AL bison t—— Darsand Second Build Up
nBposiesd =33 45-1, «+ ,5-(12)
Ly-1--4 NC Intermediate CC--43 (12-0) + Wel-d,
cc-57 Reset ABP-31-32-33 “PF cea-57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |52=1,2,3-(12) [52-311 =
Seq Ctr RO D-3
56~11.-9 ( ' ee e708 o 56-11-9
CC=-43 (12-0 Seq Ctr —~ = MD-43
° San t— D-rfsriiediate Reset
mBPosIo ea 52=1,2,3-(12)
kell NC Intermediate CC-43 (12-0) + 4-1-2,
icc=577 Reset ABP=31~32-33 CC=57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) |HD~4~(12) 52-311 TE
Seq Gtr RO D-3 CO-61 (12-0) ———

cC-61 (12-0)

= MD-46
ntermediate Reset
HD~4~(12)

DIVISION CYCLE 2 -contimed-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

COm1, 0099
HD=1-1,..,10 NC
if DR was > 0
HD=1+1,..,10 NO
if DR was < 0
HD-4—1,..59 NC
Intermediate RO
36—1-1 or
36-2=1,2 Or,ee,y
36-37=1, os,
36-38-11
43m1+1, oy
43-2-11
43-3-1,o0,
43-h-11
43~5el, sey
43=6~11
43—Jal, oes
43-8-11
43-9-1 pees
43-10-11

CC-1, 2259

22-1-1,..,10

36-1=-2,3 OFyecy
36=35-11,12

CO-4y (2-1 1/3)
4 3—ho12
36-391 NC

CC=45
(1/16 11-13)
87-1-1

Counter Magnets

MC-DR (1-2)
MC-DR (3-6)
MC-DR (5)
MC-DR (7)
MC-DR (9)

Q-Shift Ctr
Magnets

Q-Shift "Elusive
One" Control
87-1-(4)

Q-Shift
"Elusive One"
88~1-(4,)

CC=46 (2-13 1/3)
ABP~35
87~1-1,

a)

+ CC-1,..,9

—Ty 221-1, 4.510
t

001929 39,7 579679899? 36-213
Intermediate RO ~

+ CC-hy (2-1 1/3)
a=

_ABnhe12

(eC-46 (2-13 1/3)
= 35

-h

&

36-20-1,..5
eee oes
ry Q > MD-2

MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2)

coll

col.2

- 13
Q-Shift Counter Magnets

am MD~41
Q-Shift "Elusive One" Control
87~-1-(4)

+ 00-45 (1/16 11-13)
+o? 87-1-1

=-Mp-41
2 ont "Elusive One*

88-1-(4)

gos

DIVISION CYCLE 3

As in multiplication cycle 3, the intermediate counter resets, If u nine stood in the 24th column of the intermediate counter, a nine is
read to the 47th column of the PQ counter as in miltiplication cycle 3. The first build up takes place; i.e., twice the DR is read from
the doubling moldings of MC-DR (1-2) to MC=DR (3-6), (4-8), (5) and (9). The MC-DR carry control and carry relays are picked up and the
carry impulse completes the first build up. Assuming the DD to lie in storage counter 20, code 53, the sequence mechanism reads the line
of coding (53, blank, blank), The sequence relays and the storage counter out relays are picked up as in miltiplication cycle 3. The seq-
uence counter is advanced to read-out position 4. In preparation for the next cycle the intermediate in, first and second build up, second
build up and add-22 relays are energized. The entry control relays for MC-DR (4-8) are picked up as in multiplication cycle 3,

fagnet 9 0 9

56 Divide

52 Intermediate Reset

HD-4 Intermediate Reset
Intermediate Counter Magnets

7O Sign Control #1

71 Sign Control #2
PQ 47th column Counter Magnet.

44 First Build Up

92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (3-6) Bone ae | |

45 First and Second Build Up
MC=-DR Entry Control (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8)
MC=DR Counter Magnets (5) -
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)

26 MC-DR Carry Control |

49 MC-DR Carry |

Seq-31 Control

Seq-A-5-1

Seq-A-3-1,2,3

8C20-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out ls
Sequence Counter Magnet

50 Intermediate In

45 First and Second Build Up

46 Second Build Up

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)

Ja.

90S

32 Add 22
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC+10 (0-0 1/2) [Sequence + $C=10 (0-0 1/2)
56-13-1 Counter Magnet, i . . 56-13=1
14-1-3 NC -1-3
Bell NC ~1-1

~ 13
Sequence Counter Magnet.

DIVISION CYCLE 3 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
We1-4. NC Intermediate In |CC-43 (12-0)
CC=55 50-1,2,3-(12) | ABP=31-32-33
(12 1/2-13 2/3) 50+3-11
Seq Ctr RO Be4
56-11-10 6-11-10
Seq Ctr RO Be4 4 Q —~o }D<h3
0-0-0 pOn3-11 Intermediate In
ABP=31=32=33 ry 50-1,2,3-(12)
14-1-4 NC First and Second|CC~43 (12-0) . + dy-l~4-
cc-56 Build Up ABP-31-32-33 C=56 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
G2 1/2-13 2/3) AS5aLyeeg5-(12) [45-511
eq Ctr i
56-11-11 (2-0) OP 29347 5°607°8°O? 5641112
CC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO C-4 e Q pane ~= WD-h2
5a) First and Second Build Up
y-1-4. NC Second Build Up |CC-43 (12-0) + 1h-l-h
CC=57 46~1,..,5=(12) |ABP-31-32-33 CC=57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
eq Ctr
56-11-12 0°1°2°3°), 6-11-12
IcC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO D4 4 = YD-1,2
= OesOns0 fb-5-11 Secom Build Up
ABP=31=32=33 4 46-1, .2,5=(12)
ly-1-4 NC Add-22 CC~43 (12-0)
CC=57 32—1=(4) ABP~31-32~33 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) Z2—l9h
Seq Ctr .
56-12-1 6717293947 876979809? 56 n12=1
[CC-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO D-4 ry = MD-35
o-~0-0. 32ml-i, Add=2
ABP=31=325330 32-1-(4)

DIVISION CYCLE &

The DD is read from storage to the intermediate counter as in cycle 1. The entry of a nine into the 24th column of the intermediate counter
(a negative DD) picks up the intermediate 2th colum read-out control relay as in cycle 1. The second build up takes place as in mlti-
plication cycle 4; i.e., twice the DR is read from the doubling moldings of MC=-DR (1-2) to MC-DR (4-8) and (5); six times the DR is read
from the doubling moldings of MC-DR (3-6) to MC=DR (7) and (9). The MC-DR carry control and carry relays are picked up and the carry im-
pulse completes the second build up as in miltiplication cycle 3. From two dial switches, 22-N (where the operating decimal point lies be~
tween columns N and N+ 1) is added into the Q-shift counter. The Q-shift carry control and carry relays are picked up and the carry im-a
pulse completes the entry, The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 5. In preparation for the next cycle, the intermediate S
invert. control and intermediate invert relays (as in mltiplication cycle 4) are picked up if DD is negative.

DIVISION CYCLE &£ -continued-

The shift pick up, shift and

DD in relays are picked up in order to read DD from the intermediate counter to the DD counter with ite first significant digit in the 45th

column of DD.

Magnet

0

56 Divid

71 Sign

26 NC-DR
49 MC-DR

28 Q-Shi

35 Shift

36 Shirt

Control #2

Carry Control
Carry

32 Add--22
Q-Shift Counter Magnets
25 QShift Carry Control

ft Carry

Pick Up

57 DD In

Sequence Counter Magnet
94 Intermediate Invert Control
HD-~1 Intermediate Invert

SC20-1,2,3 Storage Counter Out
50 Intermediate In

Intermediate Counter Magnets
89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control

45 First and Second Build Up

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (5)

46 Second Build Up
MC-DR Counter Magnets (7)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (9)

hi

80¢

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CO=1, 6059
Addj22 Switches
86-1-1,2 NO
32-1-1,2

CC=hy (2-1 1/3)
321-3

Q-Shift Ctr
Magnets

Q-Shift Carry
Control
25-1-(4)

CO-L6 (2-13 1/3)
ABP=35
25-1-h

im an aes
L--_» o- Lame 4__.col.] +
Add=-22 2-1-2 Q-Shift Counter Magnets
4__cols

a

C=

Switches

(2-1 1/3)
led

Cm46 (2-13 1/3)

“et

25elol
BP35 ee

6-1-1

MD ~3 5

MD-13

Q-Shift Carry Control

25~1-(4)

DIVISION CYCLE 4 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Cireuit Circuit Diagram

CCH45 Q-Shift Carry + 00-45 (1/16 11-13)

(1/16 11-13) 28-1-(4) A 251-1

25-1-1 -° ~ MD=35
SL G-Shirt Carry

28~1-(4)

4-1-4 NE Intermediate CC-43 (12-0) + W-leh

Ct~57 Invert Control |ABP~31-32-33 00-57 (12 1/2-13 2/3)

(12 1/2-13 2/3) ]94-1-(4) 9-1-4

Seq Ctr RO D-5
5b-l2—4,

Ly-1-4 NC

C055

(12 1/2-13 2/3)

Seq Ctr RO Be5

56-12-2

Intermediate
Counter

24th column

2nd midg 0 to
2nd mldgs O's

24th column

2nd mldg 9 to
3rd mlidgs 9ts

Ih-l-4 NC
CC=56

(12 1/213 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO C-5
56~12-3

Shift Pick Up

DD In
57=1,2,3-(12)

CCH42
(12+1/3 16)
351, +» pbs

CC=43_ (12-0)
ABP-31~32-33
57-3-11

P1295, 050709050 56-12-14,
Seq Ctr RO ry

CO=43 (12-0) ~ MD-38
Shel=k L-nitemediate Invert Control
=31=32=33 t Ghm1-(4)

Intermediate Counter RO
col.24 col.23 col, 2

2nd moldings
| spt

+ dhnl=i,
CO-55 (12 1/2-13 2/3)

Seq Ctr RO Be5 ° ry

col. 1

o—o |
45

CC-42 (12-1/3 16)

ie)

fe) 3 1
O B5-h5-h | 35-3<4 5-1-4
of tify: t
{e)

°
1?)
3°

3rd moldings 35-1, ..,46—(4)

! pdf

OF BWATDO OHWNO

[

Shift Pick Up Relays

TS5=LO=L) [S5=hHh_ | Y35-2-4

4 4 2(, | MD-
40

+ W-1-4

CC-56 (12 1/213 2/3)
0019293012 54.60794059 56-1203
Seq Ctr RO CH t
= Up-39

ni
‘ 57-1,2,3-(12)

60S
OTS

DIVISION CYCLE 4 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Held Circuit Circuit Diagram
cc-33 Shift CC-43 (12-0) + CG-33 (14-15 1/3) 35-L6=1 -,MD-42
(14-15 1/3) 36-1, «6,39 ABP-31. = gp hD2-12 354 5e1 =’ 936239-2 36-37, 38,39-(12,12,4)
572-12 (hy 6 or 12) |36-2-4,.25 ry a
35-(2n+1)=-1. 36-39=2 __ J ;
35~(2riel)=1 NC [ 35=had
35—(2n)—1 NC 35=3-1 t+. bn2=h, 36~2-(4)
& . a .
ts __]
35e2—1
35=1-1 ft 6-1-4, 36-1-(4)
lcc-43 (12-0) t_. ¢_| Shift
E ABP 532 36~1,.6439-(4,6 or 12)

Sign control #1 is picked up if the intermediate 24th colum read-out control relay is up as in multiplication cycle 2.
Jute value of the DD reads from the
first significant digit reads inte colum 45 of the DD counter.
shift carry circuits are as in cycle i.
The MP--DIV control pick up is energized.

Upe

up preventing the’ sequence counter
through the sequence counter read-out,

DIVISION CYCLE 5

The positive abso-
The value of DD ig read through the shift relay so that its
The amount of the DD shift left is read into the Q-shift counter. The Q-
The sequence counter is advanced to read-out position 6, The intermediate reset relay is picked
The cycle counter is advanced to read-out position 1.The MP-DIV control hold relay is picked
from advancing when CC-10 makes and further, preventing the passage of impulses from cC=-55, 56 and 57
The compare control, compare in and column shift right relays are picked up.

intermediate counter to the DD counter.

Magnet d 0 9

56 Divide eee
89 Intermediate 24th column RO Control
70 Sign Control #1
71 Sign Control #2
94 Intermediate Invert Control
HD-1 Intermediate Invert
36 shift
57 DD In
DD Counter Magnets
Q-Shift Counter Magnets
25 Q-Shift Carry Control
28 Q-Shift Carry
Sequence Counter Magnet
52 Intermediate Reset
HD-4, Intermediate Reset
13 MP=DIV Control Pick Up
Cycle Counter Magnet
8 Compare Control
4 MP-DIV Control Hold
3 Compare In
29 Column Shift Right

DIVISION CYCLE 5 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC~+1, 6259 DD Counter + CCm1 0059
HD=1-1,..,10 NC | Magnets ET”) pbmt-1,..,10

if DD was > 0
HDj-1-1,..,10 NO
if DD was < 0
HD-4-1,..,9 NM
Intermediate RO
36-1-1, wey
36-38-11
57-lel, oe,
57=2-11

CC=2, 2449
22-1-1,..,10 NC
36-19-2473 Oryeny
36-35-11, 12
(see Relay List)

CO=44 (2~1 1/3)
57~3=1

CC-45
(1/16 11-13)
Q5a1-1

ly-1-4 NC
CC=57

(12 1/2-13 2/3)
Seq Ctr RO D-6
56~12—5

CC=26 (2-1 1/3)
57=3=h,

Q-Shift Counter
Magnets

Q-Shift Carry
Control
25-1-(4)

Q-Shift Carry
28-1-(4)

Intermediate
Reset
52-1,2,3-(12)

MP=-DIV Control
Pick Up
13-1-(6)

CC=46
(2-13 1/3)
ABP=35
25=1=l,

CC=43 (12-0)
ABP-31~32-33
52~e3~11

CC#47 (3 1/2-16)
3-1-6

o 172939 4° 5°6

Intermediate Ctr RO

+ CC+1,..,9
22-1-1,..,10  36-1-2,3 or ,..,
6-35-11, 12

36-1-1,..,
638-11 57-1-1,..,

4 pizeell

, Q ~o_YD-9,10
D Counter

Magnets

- MD-13
a o-shirt Counter Magnets

+ CC=44 (2-1 1/3)
73-1

CCm. 2-13 1,

ABP=35 25e1-(4)

tJ

+ 00-45 (1/16 11513)
- cs 1-1

r = MD-35
25-1-h Qt rt Carry Control

t_. Qo ee
Q-Shift Carry

28~1-(4)

+ Wl,
CC--57 (12 1/213 2/3)

0°22" 345° 7%9%° Sook
Seq Ctr RO D-

CC=43 (12-0)
“s2efoiT)
ABPCS ICT 273 arene |

Qa WDMH3
ntermediate Reset
)

4. §336 (2-1 1/3) 1,

t_,__

52-1,2 ,3-(12

t - MD-34
eC-47 (3 1/2-16) Serer Control Pick Up
eet goes 3-1-(6)

TTS

DIVISION CYCLE 5 -continued-

ras:

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC=80 Cycle Counter + CC-80 (1/16 12-9)
(1/16 12-9) Magnet “_ mL y 209-2
Tal, oo99-2 NC 13-11
13-1-1 4 CC-54, (12-12 1/2)
CC=54, ry = W~13
(12-12 1/2) ee ae Counter Magnet
CC-80 Compare Control + CC-80 (1/16 12-9)
(1/16 12-9) 8=1~(4) EE. __ Tay 009 9u2
Toda rs? NC “1-1 0-34
1B-l-1 -
t+. Compare Control
8-1-(4)
69-2-1,2 NC MP-DIV Control |12-1,2-2 Nc + 69=2~1
13-1-3 Hold or 13-1-3
cc=58 WYy-1-(12) CC=32 (8 1/2=2) 9-2-2 OF Ce 58 (14-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) and pF 1b ET 13-1-2
13-1-2 Uy-1-11 t © -, MD-34,
r ~ QnQe2 | t—- Leo Control Hold
|cc~32 (8 1/222) F Uy-lel) W-1-(12)
A [ ee |
cC-40 Compare In cc=39 + CC-hO (1/16 15-9)
(1/16 15-9) BaLyeey2h-(12) | (1/3 15-12) “TEL re
13-14, 3—_25—(4) 3—2h—11 2__p56-13-2
56-13-2 3-25-1,2 CC-39 (1/3 15~12) 8-1-3
8-1-3 4 mann a 4 ~ 33
a B-1-4, whee 92h (2) Compare In
-2h= + | -
| —-25=(4)
“~__]

69-2-1,2 NC Column Shift cc-36 (12-0) + 69-2-1
3-1-3 Right ABP—27 1-1-3
oca58 29=3h 35, 36— 29-366 9-2-2" | CC-58 (14-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) 12,12,6) a 191-1
19-11 NC 18-1-1
Ne-1-1 NC “ t §6-9-1,.., Column
Cycle Ctr RO A-1 0.0.0.0 0 ,0.0,0.0 pe7iOn-1l Shift Right
569ml, wa, bC-36 (12-0) 0°? 2°3°1,° 576779899” F 4 = MD-35

56-10-11 - ~ 29-366 Cycle Ctr RO Aq 29=3),,35 9 36—

ABP=27 ee (12,13,63

DIVISION CYCLE 6
The intermediate counter resets as in cycle 3. Sign control #1 drops out.
a nine is read into the 47th column of the PQ counter as in multiplication cycle 3,
The comparison is made and the appropriate over-under relays picked up.
energized which picks up the proper times right relay.
the DR miltiple during the next cycle,

If a nine stood in the 24th column of the intermediate counter
The DD and DR read into the DD and DR compare relays.
The over-under relay permits the appropriate Q control relay to be
The column shift right and MC-DR invert relays are picked up in order to subtract

Magnet 9 (0) 9

56 Divide
70 Sign Control #1
71 Sign Control #2
PQ 47th column Counter Magnet ]
52 Intermediate Reset
HD=5 Intermediate Reset
Intermediate Counter Magnets BERBER EBSE
14 MP-DIV Control Hold
3 Compare In
29 Column Shift Right
6 DD Compare
2 DR Compare
1 Over-Under
7 Q Control
5 Times Right
29 Column Shift Right
HD~-2 MC-DR_ Invert

DD RO
3-21-1,.0,
3-2h-9
56—3-1y oe,
56-6-9
29-3h-1y vey
29-35-11
3-19-1, 005
3-20-11

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CCH1, 2259 DD Compare CC-28 (9-12) + CCH2, 6659

HD=3-1,..,10 NC |6—-1,..,24-(12) JABP-24 HD=3—1, 42,10

HD=6-1, 2059 NC 6m1, 00 2hal2 HD-6-1,..,9

Ba2l-1, eos
071029 394576979809? 32h 9 5o-3-1,.05

DD 0 t_Ba6-9

29-3hm 1, ey
29-35-11 Bol9mly sey

¢ o720-11
{CC-28 (9-12) ~ MD-34
OrLs or s2hm12 |
ABPOIL o * ’
DD Compare
6H, «2 324=(12)

DIVISION CYCLE 6 -continued-

Las)

CC-2h A,B, 0,D
ABP=25 26
6-1, ve on

le
21y oe p216-1 NC
2-1, oe 9216-2

cc-377
(11-1/4 12)
3~21,--10,12
LHL, oe ph 32e1

Over—Under
La1y 0 5h23=(4)

Q Control
ToL yo y9e (4)

CC-34 (912).
ABP=20
1-1, oo 923593
CC#35 (9-12)
ABP=21

cc-38 (11 1/29)
Pm ).—3

2-1, 6+ 5216-1
+ CC-24 A,B,C,D 6-1,.6,2h-2, 00,97
+ 2ahy oe 216-2

ABPCI5; 30" F ft
eoaF {9=12)
6. ed, 00 5235-3
af (9-12) ABP=20 a Sa
7238s + » 923-3
t__

ABPOOT

+ CC-37 (11-1/4 12)
= 24,10 1-h6-1
‘
2m de 1-45=1
sed oan
“baby Ea

_Aelel
ol7i-3

t.._.__.

loc=38 (11 1/2=9)

Pick Up Cirait Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CCH1, 0059 DR Compare CC-27 (9-12) + CHL, 09
HD=21,..,10 NC /2-1,..,216-(4) JABP~23 r HD-2=1,..,10
HD~5-1, 20 9NC 2m iLy oo yl 20=1, ft HD=5=1, 0099
MC-DR RO ( ° ft
3-1-1,.. CC+28 (9-12) 3-l-1,.o,
3-18-12 ABP=24, 0°19 293945617289? 3-18-12
2-121, ..y216=4 |cc~27 (9-12) MC~DR RO om MD~1, 26522
oO DR Compare
ABP=23 L__g@a dee + 9120-4 21, oo 2lb~(4)
lnd=as (9-12)
~ oad2) 60216 [2-1, ..5120~(4)
ABP=2),

2-121, ..,216-(4)

~,MD~23,..,31

1-(2n)-(4)
La] y 00 235~(4)
1~236 5 00 5423—(4.)

~ MD=34
Q Control
Jm1=(4)

DIVISION CYCLE 6 -continued-

aX

= MD~46
MC-DR Invert
HD-2-(12)

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram

CC+31 (12 1/2-9)|Times Right CC-36 (12-0) + CC=31 (12 1/2-9)

ToL, 0059-1 Bal, oe p27 ABP..27 =| (or

12,12,4) 5=3n-h - MD~32
CC~36 (12-0) Times Right
ABP=27 a
69-2-1,2 NC Column Shift CC-36 (12-0)
ooose Right P bora
2934 35 536— 29-3

(14-15 1/3) (1251236)

19=1-1 NC

18=1-1 NC

Cycle Ctr RO A-1 56-91,

Cycle Ctr RO A-1 - MD-35
Dan Shirt

Right
29~34,.535,36
(12,12,65

CC~40 MC-DR Invert CC-39 + CC-40 (1/16 15-9)

(1/36 15-9) HD-2-(12) Q/ 15-12) lW-l-2 fasea

56-13-2 °

8~1-3,4 NC

DIVISION CYCLE 7

The selected DR miltiple is subtracted from DD (the elusive one substitutes for the end around carry). The first digit of the quotient is
added into PQ. The cycle counter is advanced. The compare control, compare in and column shift left relays are picked up.

STs
DIVISION CYCLE 7 -continued-

Magnet

9 Oo. . 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2
14 MP-DIV Control Hold
HD-2 MC-DR Invert
5 Times Right
29 Column Shift Right
DD Counter Magnets
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry
60 Elusive One
PQ Counter Magnets
8 Compare Control
Cycle Counter Magnet
3 Compare In
21 Column Shift Left

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CCH1, 0059 DD Counter + COm1, 1059
HD-2-1, -+,10 Magnets “HA fD-2-1,..,10
HD=5=1, 20,9 NC HD 5—1, 2059
MC=DR RO
5en-Lyeoy 5anmLyesy

5-2n-12 5-2n-12 3-19-Lycey
31953 wm reas MC=-DR RO : 20-12 29-3hn) ”»

—20- t 2973 el

29-3 aly ses t

29-35-12 7
56-31, ey

6-6-9 5b-3-Lyeey

3mQlal NCyoes 6-6-9 321-1, sey DD-Counter

3-24-9 NC had Magnets

Cnn a a ’ 10
CCHh4 (2-1 1/3) DD Carry CC-46 (2-13 1/3) | +, CC-A4 (2-1 1/3) ‘
5-3n=-1 con) AEP35 = bean 1 6
56-13-4, 27=1-(4, 27~1-k, ~ 8 5613 <b
|cc-46 (2-13 1/3) ar Te — MD~35
er 27-1-h LS try Control
KBP =35 t : 27H 1-(4
CC-4,5 DD Carry + 00-45 (1/16 11-13)
(1/16 11-13) 61-1, .- ,4—(12) TH _27a1-1
27=1-1 t. Q a= MD-1,5
DD Carry
6le1, ..,4-(12)

9TS
DIVISION CYCLE 7 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

CC-44 (2-1 1/3)
5-3n-1

56-13-3
29-3n-1 or
21-3n=1

CC-12

(12-12 1/2)

Carry BP

DD Carry
Contacts

61-1-1,..,
61-4=9

60-l-1
60~2—1,, 2,005
60~23-1,2

cCc~1, oe Pi
5-3n=2
21=3n—2 or
29=3n-2
56~7aL pees
56—8=11

Elusive One
60-1, «+ 523=(4)

DD Counter
Magnets

PQ Counter
Magnets

CC-46 (2-13 1/3)
ABP~35
60-1, 2 y23—4

+ CC~4.

(2-1 1/3)

b23n-1

leone (2=13 V3)
TBPS35 °

t

Om, oa 23h

r 56-13=3 21-3n-1 or

t 29a3n-1

4 Qe yD-45
Elusive One

+ CC~12 (12-12 1/2)
EL

60~1, 05 23~(4)

Carry BP

CO=1; 2.59

+
= prs n-2 21-3n-2 or

t_29-3n-2

DD Carry
Contacts. 61-1-1 DD Counter
col, 1 9 5 4 60-2-2 Magnets
10 ¢ -—.)_,
—— _POrdn1 col. 1
colh2 9@ og 60-32 ~
| 10 ren . Q
— 0-2-1 col, 2
col.22 9 6 0-23 =2
| 10 ¢ —.~0
60-221 ; col.22
§1-2-11 4
col.23 9 _ 4 "
[| 209 7 | 4g,
adil co1.23
an ry
‘col. ieee yi
~ MD-9
pon ave col.2k
col. | oot oS rr
Li gates Lo. coledk
. L_.9 L-= }D-10
col.45
B6-T~ds ees
r) 56-8-11

= MD~12
— PO Counter Magnets

LTS
DIVISION CYCLE 7 -continued-

TS

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

cC-80
(1/16 12-9)
Jolyoe, 9-2 NC
W-1-5

CC=40

(1/16 15-9)
Ly-1-2
56-13-2
8-1-3 s 4

69=2-1,2 NC

We-l-1

cC=58

(14-15 1/3)

19={1-1 NC

18=1-1 NC

Cycle Ctr RO A-2

5b—Jal,oey
56-10-12

Compare Control
Be1-(4)

Compare In
3-1, oe »2h~(12)
3~=25-(4)

Column Shift
Left

21-31,32,33-
(12,12,6)

cc~39

(1/3 15-12)
3-24-11
3~25"1,2

CC~36 (12-0)
ABP~27
21-33-6

06-89 (1/16 12-9)

“1-5

t.— =, MD-34,
— Compare Control
B~1—(4)
+ 0gr40 (1/16 15~9)
olknl-2 , >
ee (1/3 15-12) 113
j—-2h~1) t =, MD=33
ry . lak Compare In
ry : ~, MD-38
= 2522 3~25=(4)
ea

laelel
C0958 (14-15 V/3)
¥' daa}-

er 24° 1° 607%? °
Cycle Ctr RO A»2

6-10-12

56-Gel, wey

PA tp 0 5 5

Column Shift Left

21-31,32,33-(12,12,6)

DIVISION CYCIE 8

This cycle duplicates the compare operations of cycle 6. During the latter part of the cycle, column shift left and times right relays are
picked up in preparation for the next cycle.
DIVISION CYCLE & -continued-

Magnet 9. 0 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2
14 MP-DIV Control Hold
3 Compare In
21 Column Shift Left
6 DD Compare
2 DR Compare
1 Over Under Lit i
7 Q Control
5 Times Right
21 Column Shift Left
HD=2 MC=-DR Invert

DIVISION CYCLE 9

This cycle duplicates the subtract operations of cycle 7 and the entry into the PQ counter, except for the interchange of right and left on
the column shift relays. :

,

Magnet 9 0 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2
Li, MP-DIV Control Hold
HD=2 MC-DR Invert
5 Times Right
21 Column Shift Left
DD Counter Magnets ae . BREE
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry =_
60 Elusive One
PQ Counter Magnets s SEER EE
Cycle Counter Magnet .
8 Compare Control
3 Compare In
29 Column Shift Right

DIVISION CYCLE 10

The alternate compare and subtract cycles continue as in cycles 6 and 9. When the cycle counter reaches read-out position 9, the E relay is
picked up.

61S
DIVISION CYCLE 10 -continued=

Magnet 9 0) 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2
14 MP=DIV Control Hold
3 Compars In.
29 Column Shift Right
6 DD Compare.
2 DR Compare
1 Over-Under i i
7 Q-Control
5 Times Right
29 Column Shift Right
HD-2 MC=-DR Invert

17 E
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circait Circuit Diagram
69-2=1.,2 NC Ee Relay eC=16 (12-0)
W-1-1. 17=-1-(4) ABP--27 Uy,-1-1

cc-58 L7—Ied,

TOE c0-58 (14-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) ; 4 Cars
19=1-(1 NC 8-1-1 Cycle Ctr 9's

Carry Contact

181-11 NC
Cycle Ctr 9's
Carry Contact

0236 (12-0)

~ O. _ ltni-4
ABP=27 t

DIVISION CYCLE 11

This is a normal subtract cycle. If the E relay was picked up on the previous cycle, the F relay is now energized, whether or not the
previous cycle was a "no~go", by means of the E relay and the F control relay. If the divielon has proceeded as far as the column shift
right relay 29-7,8,9-(12 ,12,6), shifting the DR to subtract from columns 4-27 of DD, the G relay is picked up altering the read-out molding
of the cycle counter to molding C, since this counter has reached read-out position 19.

0@S
‘DIVISION CYCLE 11 -continued-

Magnet

9 ce) 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2
14 MP=DIV Control Hold
HD=2 MC-DR Invert
5 Times Right
29 Column Shift Right
DD Counter Magnets
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry
60 Elusive One
PQ Counter Magnets
164 F Control
65 G Control
17 E
18 F
19G
8 Compare Control
Cycle Counter Magnet

3 Compare In
21 Column Shift Left LL
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC=4h (2-1 1/3) |F Control COm46 (2-13 1/3)] + COmk4 (2-1 1/3)
17-1-2 64=1=(4.) ABP+35 = lz? 10-35
hale. ry - MD-
lec-46 (2-13 1/3) dene Stol
banat 6h-1-(4)
ABP=35 4
CC-44 (2-1 1/3) |G Control CO-46 (2-13 1/3)] + CO-44 (2-1 1/3)
29-9(2)-1 65-1-(4) {P38 = P9-H(2)-1 10-35
Ioc-46 (2-13 1/3) —~L-stsitrot
65-1-h, 65-1-(4)
” 4.4)
69-2=1,2 NC F Relay 12-1,2-2 NC or + 69-2-1,2
U-1-1 18-1=(4) CC-32 (8 1/2-2) adhenl-1
CC-79 (6=§ 1/3) and {cc-31 (12 172-9) CC-79 (6-5 1/3)
HD-2-11 1-1-4 8-1-1 ‘ =i HD=2-11
17-1-1 or t 3-1-1 ¢__17-1+1
CC+31 (12 1/2-9) t_bhel=1 = MD-34,
8-1-1 18-1-4 ry Rélay
63-1-1 t 18-1-(4)
641-1

6G

DIVISION CYCLE 11 -contimued-
Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
69-2-1,2 NC iG Relay 2-1, 2-2 NC or
U-l-2 n9=1=(4) po33 (8 1/2-2) 1-1
cc-60 (6~5 1/3) nd cc (6-5 1/3)
HD- 2-2 9-H k, HD-2-=11. s13-6
56= t._..56=13~
29-Jak, 4 429-9-k
lor ( /2-8) 4 63e4-1 1 t__. = MD-34,
cC-31 (12 1/2-9 t __piql- G Relay
g-1-1 t 0 J29-1-(4)
63-1-1
65-11 ol Qr lak

4

DIVISION CYCLE 12

This cycle, a compare cycle, shows the pick up of the "no-go" relay if the remainder standing in DD is less than all DR multiples for 4
particular columnar position, Since the Q control relay is not picked up, the cycle counter is advanced and the cycle terminates by pick-
ing up the relays preliminary to another compare cycle.

Magnet | 9 ie) 9

56 Divide
71 Sign Control #2

1, MP-DIV Control Hold
3 Compare In

21 Column Shift Left

6 DD Compare

2 DR Compare

63 No-Go

18 F

19 G

Cycle Counter Magnet

8 Compare Control

3 Compare In

29 Column Shift Right

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
CC=37 No-Go CC-38 (11 1/2-9)} + CC-37 (1-1/4 12)

(1-1/4 12) 63-1-(4) 63-1-4 24-10

3~-2h-10,12 + Q ~ MD-34

|oc-36 (11 1/2~9) 13-24-12
WH

om
eer at oe t_l | 63-1-(4)
;

DIVISION CYCLE 13

In this cycle division has been carried sufficiently far to arrive at the place limitation plugging and energize the "9" relay preliminary
to terminating the division. It is a compare cycle similar to all other compare cycles,

Magnet a te) 9

56 Divide

71 Sign Control #2

ly MP=DIV Control Hold
18 F

19 G

3 Compare In

29 Column Shift Right
6 DD Compare

2 DR Compare

1 Over-Under ee
7 QControl

5 Times Right

29 Column Shift Right
HD-2 MC-DR Invert

g Ngn |_|

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit

CC=44 (2-1 1/3) | "9" Relay CO-48 (2-4) + CCm4k (2-1 1/3)
56-13~5 9u1~(4) Jalal, =n 356-135 29-3n-3 or
29~3ne3 or t_._,@l-3n-3 Plug

21-3n=3 |CC-48 (2-4) Wir. =
Plug Wire - Jel), iow Re
¢

m1=(4)

Circuit Diagram

DIVISION CYCLE 14
The subtraction from DD and the entry of the digit of the quotient into the PQ counter are completed as in all subtract cycles, The "9"
relay permits the energizing of the A relay and the B relay also if the 47th column of PQ stands at-9. The energized A relay permits the
sequence mechanism to read setting up the sequence relays and in turn the storage counter in and repeat relays, Energizing of the A relay
will cause the MP~DIV control relay to drop out. This prevents further advance of the cycle counter and permits the sequence counter to
advance to read-out position 7. In preparation for the next cycle, under control of the sequence counter, the sequence counter reset, the
MC-DR reset, the Q-shift and the H relays are picked up. If the B relay is energized (a nine in the 47th colum of PQ) the DD-PQ invert

relay is picked up. The MC-DR entry control (1-2), (3-6) and (4-8) relays are picked up under control of the MC-DR reset relay as in
multiplication cycle 9, ;

ees
DIVISION CYCLE U4, -contimed-

Magnet 9 0 9

56 Divide
71 Sign control #2
1, MP-DIV Control Hold
18 F
19 G
HD=-2 MC-DR Invert
5 Times Right
29 Column Shift Right

DD Counter Magnets | ial
27 DD Carry Control
61 DD Carry
60 Elusive One J

PQ Counter Magnets an

9 ug
Ra
16 B
‘Seq-31 Control
Seq-B=6=1.
Seg-B-4-1,2
Seq-C-7-1.
Seq-27 Repeat.

Sequerice Counter Magnet
SC40-4,5,6 Storage Counter In
48 Sequerice Counter Reset
47 WC-DR Reset
HD~5 MC-IR Reset
91 MC-DR Entry Control (22)
92 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6
'93 MC-DR Entiry Control (4-8)

a!
w
w
w
ELI

BL
aL!
wi
uw

res

33 Q Shift
20 H
HD-3 DD-PQ Invert
\ fPick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
69-2—'1,2 NC A Relay CC=29 (6-8) =.
Uye1-1 12=1,2~(4) 12-14 guecl-1
oc-60 (6-5 1/3) 69 2—2 t CC=-60 (6-5 1/3)
9u1-1 ae — eee
t_. o, MD=3h
cC=29 (6-8) 7 A Relay
—— 2 L2-1-(4
ry =, M35
12-2-(4)

DIVISION CYCLE 14 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
pet? Nc B belay, 00-29 (6-8) + 69-2=1
~l- 16-1-(4, 16-1-4 U-1-1
CC-60 (6-5 1/3) [TF CO-60 (6-5 1/3)
9 7th col Et Tei ary Contact
column 8 Car: OnTac
9's Carry ar v
Contact ali, jo¢ ° B Re
a Teer
Lawl NC Sequence Counter|CC-43 (12-0) + Welly
CO~55 Reset ABP=31-32-33 CC=55 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(2 “i/enas 2/3) 48~1~(12) 48-1-6
. .
5oa12-6 or £30567 eho 56-12-6
Seq Ctr RO B-7 - W~42
48-16 2 xecdnce Counter Reset
=Jl=32=53 ry 48~1-(12)
ly-1-4 NC MC-DR Reset CC-43 (12-0) + Uela4
CC-56 AToaL, + 0913-(12) JABP~31-32-33 PF CC=56 (12 1/2-13 2/3)
(12 1/2-13 2/3) 47-13+10,11,12
Seq Ctr RO C-7 0.0
56-12-7 conus (12-0) 5 02°30 19 OAR? 56-12-7 upen2
[CC—4 0 eq Ctr RO C7 -
#7-13-10, Le C-DR Reset
R530 52235 ry ATa1, 00 y13-(12)
Leek NC MC-DR Reset CC-43 (12-0) + dant
CC~56 HD~5—(12) ABP-31-32-33 oi 00-56 (12 1/2=13 2/3)
(12 Teas 2/3) 47~13-10,11,12
Seq Ctr RO 6-7 C063 (12-05
56-12-7 0°19 2950,050¢088 g050 56n12~7
CC-63 (12-0) |[cc-43 (12-0) Seq Ctr RO C-7 406-63 (12-0)
= 562 2 O55 Ai-13-10,11,12) 0 ~ uD=u6 Mo
awe 3 eS ow 4 | es
HD~5~(12)
cc-33 Q-Shift cC-43 (12-0) + CC=33 (My-15 1/3)
(14-15 1/3) 33=1, . + p80= ABP=32 a=" 8-1-8
48~1~8 (4,6 or 12) 33-212 t__-d6-13-9
56-139 t
Q-Shift Ctr RO (12-0) 990909010 50g egg? 10-38
CC-43 (12-0 09192937195 Te° -
’ Z—2n-12 Q-Shift Ctr RO Qaesire
ms rw 33-1, .+,80=(4,6 or 12)

Gos

DIVISION CYCLE 14 -continued-

a

92S

Pick Up Circuit Magnet Hold Circuit Circuit Diagram
06-33 hy H Relay. CC-43 (12-0) + CC=33 (14-15 1/3)
We-15 1/3) | 20-1 6(4 2aL-h 7 181-8
181-8 p EL__itets 56-13-8
56--13-8 CC=43 (12-0) ry - MD-34
“ET. 20-1~1 Dw isray
ABPOST 20~1=(4)

DIVISION CXCLE 15

The quotient reads from the PQ counter to storage through the Q-shift relay, except for column 47 which read through the H relay. The stor-
age counter carry is completed. The sequence counter, cycle counter, 47th column of the PQ counter and MC-DR counters reset, The repeat
relay permits the pick up of the start) relay, The calculator continues in operation.

Magnet 9 0 9

HD-3 DD=PQ Invert
SCLO-4,,5,6 Storage Counter In
33 Q Shift
20 H
Storage Counter Magnets SERRE 44 a
SC40~9 Storage Counter Carry Control
SCL0-7,8 Storage Counter Carry
1A
16 B
48 Sequence Counter Reset
Sequence Counter Magnet

PQ 47th column Counter Magnet :
Cycle Counter Magnet all all all all Ml all

4'7 MC~DR Reset . 4
HD=5 MC=DR Reset a-2) |
91 MC-DR Entry Control (1-2 tC oe
MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2) WI
92 MC=DR Entry Control (3-6)
MC-DR Counter Magrets (3-6)

93 MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (5)
MC-DR Counter Magnets (7)
MC=-DR Counter Magnets (9

Seq-27 Repeat

Seq=33 Start

Seq-31 Control

Seq Relays

DIVISION CYCLE 15 -continued-

Pick Up Circuit

Magnet

Hold Circuit

Circuit Diagram

COm1, 0059
HD~3=1, 04,9 NC
HD=3-10
HD-6-1, oo 9 Ne
PQ Counter RO
33-l-1, 0, ;
33-80-11
Buss
SChO=ha1, soy
S8CLO~5—11

cc~9 (9-9 1/2)
HD-3-10

Col.46 zero
Col.47 zero or &
HD=-3—11

20~1-1

Buss

$C40~5~12

CC=2 (2-2 1/2)
T1-1-3 NC

PQ A7th colum
8 spot RO
20=1-2

CC-1 (1-1 1/2)
711-2 NC

PQ 47th column
9 spot RO
20=1=2

Storage Counter
Magnet (cols.
1-23)

Read 9 from 47th
col. of PQ to
2ith col. of
storage counter

PQ 47th colwn
Counter Magnet

+ (0-1, 00,9
HD=3=1, 2.59
HD~6-J., 059
HD-3='

*———_prv 2° 324 360° 899°

PQ Counter RO

Jala)
ee he

+ CC-9 (%9 1/2)
HD-3=9

HD-3-

col. 46

col, 47

+ CCn2 (262 1/2)
H T1-1-3

cC-1 (1-1 1/2) E ~
“EH "7Iat-2

|
025019 6° 291739 B 71,09)
PQ 47th column 20—1-2

—_t

SCLO~h=1, eeoy
SCL0~—5=1).

"Kies ° t Q a, Pali
Storage Counter Magnet

columns 1-23

Storage Counter
Magnet col.2h

J tg OME os Fels

- WD-]2
t—Leny Prt Column

Counter Magnets

Les

Relay Rew Contact Cycle Function
leL,yo+,423-(4) D 10059 | Lal, oe yhb=2 D6 | PU of Q-Control 7=1-(4)
Over Under 1-47-(4) Does not exist
D-6 2skx9
1-(47k-46) , 005 (47K) -1 p-6 | PU of QControl 7=k-(4)
{1lsi 423
1-1-3 D6 Hold
Qa1,.05216-(4) D Lyee99 | 2-2, one, 23-1 NC D=6 PU of Over Under 1-2,.(2n~2).,44-(4)
DR Compare Zeal, Me 23-2 D-6 | PU of Over Under 1-2,.(2n-1).,45-(4)
D-6 2-2h-(k) Does not exist
, 2nksa9
(24-22) one (24k) b NC p-6 | PU of Over Under I~(UTeod5) y«(BrkeD) 49 Uae =(4)
Qu(Qhk=-23) 4 oNe 5 (24K) =2 D-6 | PU of Over Under 1-(47k-46),.(2n-k).,(47k)-(4)
1si 216
2-1-4, D6 Hold
3-1,..,18-(12) 8 Lyoo99 | BednL, oop 32-12 p-6 | PU of DR Compare 2-1,..,23-(4)
3-19,..,24-(12) 8 19 |2sk=9
3-25-(4) S 21 | 3-(2k-2)-1,..,3=(2k)~12 D-6 | PU of DR Compare 2-(24k-23),.+,2hk~(4)
Compare In 3-191, «+ ,3-20-12 p-é | PU of DD Compare 6-1,..,24-(125
D=5 319-1, 005 3"20~12 NC MH6 Control read-in to FQ ctr magnets
3-191 yo oy 3-20-12 NC D~7 Control read-in to DD ctr magnets
3H21H1y 0 3-2h—9 p-6 | PU of DD Compare 6-1,..,24-(12)
Ba21e1, 009 3-2h-9 NC Mu6 Control read-in to DD ctr magnets
3-211, 00 3-2h~-9 NC Deb Control read-in to DD ctr magnets
3~21,—10,12 D6 PU of Q=Control 7-1, +0,9-(4)
p-12 | PU of No-GO 63-1-(43
3-2h=lly 3-25-1,2 D5 | Hold
hel, oe ,27-(12,12,4) S Lyeeg? | dele, 0 she 2-11 M6 Control MC-DR times 1 RO to DD ctr magnets
Times Left hm (3k-2 a1, « p4—(3k-1)-12 ¥-6 | Control MC-DR times k RO to DD ctr magnets
N-5 4-3k-1 Me6 | PU of DD Carry Control 27~1-(4)
4e-3k=4, M-5 Hold
Bal, o0,27=(12,12,4) 8 Lyeoy9 | 5-1-2, 20, 52-11 N-6 Control MC-DR times 1 RO to PQ ctr magnets
Times Right D=6 Control MC-DR times 1 RO to DD ctr magnets
is 5a (Bk 2)a1, «oy 52 (3kK-1)~12 w-6 Control MC-DR times k RO to PQ ctr magnets
5=3k=1 M6 PU of PQ Carry Control 2ira-th}
D-7 | PU of DD Carry Control 27-1-(4
PU of Elusive One 60-1,..,23=(4)
5=3ka2 De=7 Controls Q Entry into PQ ctr
5=-3k=k, Me5 Hold

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
6-1, ..,24-(12) D 10 6-1, 26,231 D-6 | PU of Over Under 1-2,.(2n-2).,44-(4) or 1-2,.(2n-1).,45-(4)
DD Compare 6-24-1 D=6 PU of Over Under 1-46-(4)
De6 6-1, on. 2hek D-6 | PU of Over Under 1-(47k-A6),.(2n—k).,(47k)-(4)
or 1-(47k=-45),.(2n~k-1)., (47K-1)=(4)
6-1, ..,2h-12 D-6 | Hold
Jal, oey9-(h) D 10 isk=9
Q-Control T=(k)-1 D6 PU of Times Right 5-(3k-2)-(12); 5=(3k-1)-(12); 5=(3k)=(4)
D~6 7=(k)=-2 NC M-5 | Controls read-in to Cycle ctr
De5
Jo-(k)=3 D6 Hold
81-(4) S 10 8-1-1 D-1l | PU of F 181-(4); G 19-1-(4)
Compare Control 8-1-3,4 D-5 PU of Compare In 3-1,..,24-(12)3 3=-25-(4)
D-5 8-1-3,4 NC D6 PU of MC-DR Invert HD-2~(12)
G-1-(4) D 10 9-1-1 D-1h | PU of A 12-1,2-(4)3 B 16-1-(4)
"Oo" Relay 9-1-4 D-13 | Hold
D-13
10-1-(4) $ 10 10-1-1 -- Controls read-in to Log Cycle ctr
LE 10-1-2 -- | PU of MC-DR Reset 47~1,..,13-(12) (Log)
10-13 -- [PU of LF 11-1-(6); 11-2-(4)
10-1-4, --  |Hold
136} | 10 11-1-1 --  |PU of LIO In #2 189-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
11-2-(4) $ 1-1-2 -- |Hold of LE 10-1-(4); IM 42-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
LF 11-1-3 NC -- PU of Intermediate In 50=-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
1-1-4 --  |Hold of LG 201-1-(4) -
11-1-5 --  |PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet (not used)
11-1-6 “= Hold
11-2-2- NC - -. |PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
12-1,2-(4) 8 10,11 | 12-1-1 -- Controls read-in to Sine Sequence ctr #2
A 12-1, 2-2 M-5 Hold of MP-DIV Control Hold 14-1-(12)
M-10 De5
Del, M7 Hold of F 18-1-(4)
D-11
12-1, 2-3 M-10 | PU of Read Control Seq=31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
D-14
12-14, M10 | Hold
D-1k
13-1-(6) S 10 13-1-1 M=5 Controls read=-in to Cycle ctr
MP-DIV Control Pick-Up De5
Ma5 D=5 PU of Compare Control 8-l-(4)
De5 13-1-2 M=5 PU of MP=DIV Control Hold 14-1-(12)

or

k
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
13-1-(6) $ 10 131-3 Mo5 FU of MP=DIV Control Hold 14-1~(12); Column Shift Right
(continued) D-5 29-1, ++ ,36—(12,12,6)
13-14, D5 PU of Compare In 3~1,..,24-(12); 3-25=(4)
13-15 -- PU of XJ 216-1~(6); EB Shift 213 and 214 (Exp)
13-1-6 M-5 Hold
D=5
U-1-(12) s 10 W-1-1 U=5 PU of Colum Shift Left 21-1 oop 36~(12,12,6)3 Column Shift
MP-DIV Control Hold Tb Right 291, .»,36-(12,12,65
Hs M-10 |PU of A 12=1-(4)3 B 16-1-(4)
D=5 Del,
Neb PU of E 17-1-(h.)
De10
M-7 PU of F 18-1-(4)
Del
M-8 | PU of Co 66-1-(4)3 Dz 67=1~(4)
14,-1-2 I+7 |PU of Compare In 3-1) .0,2h-(12)3 3-25-(4)
D6 PU of MC-DR Invert HD~2~(12)
Uy-1-3 NC uo Controls read-in to Sequence ctr
I .
W-1-4, NC v-0 Controls RO of Sequence ctr
DO
We-1-5 M-6 Controls read~in to Cycle ctr
b-7 PU of Compare Control 6-1-(4); Controls read-in to Cycle ctr
UWy1=9 M6 Hold of PQ 23rd Col 68--1-(4)
UWyel-11 M-5 Hold
TS
15-1-(4) & 10 151-1 ~- |Controls reset of Sequence ctr to 4 (Exp)
3G 15-1-2 NC «= |PU of MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(12) (Exp)
151-3 4 ~— Hold
16-1+(4) § 10 lé=1-1 we20 PU of DD-PQ Invert HD~3~(12)
B
We10 16=1-4, M-10 |Hold
Del, Dey,
17-1=(4) D 10 Lf-1+1 M=7 PU of F 18-1=(4)
E D-1L
M6 17=1-2 D-1L |PU of F Control 64-1-(4)
D-10 Li-14 M6 Hold
D-10
18-1.-(4) D 10 1e-L-1 M8 |Controls Cycle ctr RO A & B midge
F 1éim1L-2 NS Controls Cycle ctr RO C & D midgs
M-7 lée-l-4 N=] Hold
Tell Dell

oes

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
19-1-(4) D 10 19-1-1 NC M-5  |}Controls Cycle ctr RO
G De5
D-11 19-l=4, Dell | Hold
20-1-(4) S 10 20-1-1 D-15 | Controls RO of PQ 47th col
H 20-1-2 D=15 | Controls reset of PQ 47th col
D-1, 20-1-4, Del, | Hold
21-1, «.,36-(12,12,6) 8 i isksl :
Column Shift Left 21-(3k=2)=-1,..,21-(3k-1)-12 u-6 Control shift of miltiple of MC-DR to cols 2k up of DD
a) De=7,8
D-7 21-31, «+, 21-35-12 --' |control shift of mltiple of MC-DR to cole 0 up of DD
lisnelk ;
21-3n—1 D-7 PU of Elusive One 60-1,..,23-(4)
21=3n-2 De? Controls Q-Entry into PQ ctr
21-3n-3 D-13 | PU of "9" relay 9-1-(4)
21-3n-5 M5 Controls MP ctr RO 2nd midg
21-3n-6 M5 Hold
22-1-(12) S 11 22—1-1,..,10 D-2 Control Invert of Q-Shift ctr
Q-Shift Invert 22-l—11 D-1 Hold —
D~1
23-1—(4) S 11 23-11 M1 PU of Intermediate Carry 53-1,2~-(12)
Intermediate Carry 23-lal, M-1 Hold
Control
M-1
D-1
Ae1-(4) 8 1l Zell M6 «| PU of PQ Carry 62-1,..,4-(12)
PQ Carry Control 2h-l=h, M6 Hold
M6 .
25-1-(4) 8 11 251-1 D-4 | PU of Q-Shift Carry 28-1-(4)
Q-Shift Carry Control 25=1-4, Ded Hold
D-4 :
26=1-(4) D 1 26-1=1 M-3 PU of MC-DR Carry 49~1,..,10-(12)
MC=DR Carry Control 26—1el, u-3 Hold
M-3
27a1-(4) 8 1 27-1-1 u-6 =| PU of DD Carry 61-1,..,4~(12)
DD Carry Control 27-1lek M6 Hold
Del,

Tes

[Q-shift

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
28-1-(4) S n 28-1~1,2 D-1,4 |Control Q-Shift Carry
Q-Shift Carry
D-k,
29-1,..,36-(12,12,6) 8 [12 |1=k #12 ;
29-9(2)=(4) 12 29—(3k—-2)=1, «+ p29--(3k~].) 12 u-6 | Control Multiple by (2k-1)st col of MP to cols (2k-1) up of
Column Shift Right D5 PQ or DD
M~5 29-3k=1 D-7 PU of Elusive One 60--1,.. 923~(4)
D=5 29 =F kod D-7 Controls Q-Entry into PQ ctr
29=3k-3 D-13 | PU of "9" relay 9-1-(4)
29-91, Dell |PU of G 19-1-(4)
29-3k=5 Me5 Controls MP ctr RO 2ad midg
29-3k~6 M-5 | Hold
De5
29-9(2)-1 Dell |PU of G Control 65-1-(4)
30-1-(12) D 12 30-1-1,2 NC M-5 Hold of MP Cycle Control Hold 37-1,.. 226=(4,6 or 12)
C Relay 30-1-3 Mn PU of DD-PQ Transfer #2 59-1,2-(12); 59=-3-(6)5; MP Reset
N-9 40-1,2,3-(12); MC-DR Reset 47-1,..+,13-(12); MC-DR Reset
HD~5~(12)
| 30~1=4, ~ = |Controls RO of Log Cycle ctr
30-15 -- PU of EIO Reset 218~1,2,3-(12)
30-1-6 -~  |Controls RO of Sine Sequence ctr #1
30~1-7 -- PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
30-1-8,9 NC N-5 Hold of MP Cycle Control Hold 37=1,..,26-(4,6 or 12)
30-110 NC M-8 PU of Co 66-1-(4)
301-11. Me9 Hold
31-1-(12) D 12 3le1-1,2 NC M-5 Hold of MP Cycle Control Hold 37=1,..,26~(4,6 or 12)
D Relay 31-143 M-9 PU of DD-PQ Transfer #2 59-1,2-(1253 59-3-(6); MP Reset
M-9 L0-1,2,3+(12); MC-DR Reset 47=1,..,13-(12); MC-DR Reset
HD-5=(12)
31-1-4 -- Controls RO of Log Cycle ctr
31-1-5 -- |PU of EIO Reset 218-1,2,3=(12)
31-1-6 -- Controls RO of Sine Sequence ctr #1
31-1-7 --  |PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
31-1-8,9 NC M~5 Hold of MP Cycle Control Hold 37-1,..,26-(4,6 or 12)
32-1-10 NC M-8 | PU of D2 67=1-(4)
31-1-11 M-9 Hold
32-1-(4.) § 2 32-1-1,2 De |Control read=in to Q-Shift ctr
Add-22 32~1=3 D-4 | PU of Q-Shift Carry Control 25~-1-(4)
D=3 32=1-L, D-3 Hold
33-1, «+932-(12) S 13 oS k 22
33-3392 shb-2) s W 33-(45-2k)—1, oo y33-(46-2k)—12 | D~15 {Control shift of PQ RO k cols to right
33-47,.2,70-(4,6 or 12) 8/20 |O<k «11
33-71, +» y80—(12) Ss 21 33-(47 + k)=(4,6 or 12) D=15 |Control supply of k nines to left of PQ-RO

Ges

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
(continued)
33—1,..532-(12) 2Sk S22
33—33, .6,46-(12) S 33-(35 + 2k)-1,.., D-15 jControl supply of k nines to left of PQ RO
33~L7,2+,70-(4,6 or 12) 8 33-(36 + 2k)~3,5 or 11
33=71,..,80-(12) § OoSk sll
Q-Shift 33-(47 + k)-h,6 or 12 D-15 |Hold is last point
Dl, 12% k = 22
33=(36 + 2k)-4,6 or 12 D-15 j}Hold is last point
34-1,2,3+(12) 8 wy 3hm1-1, .. ,34-2-12 M-11 |Control PQ ctr RO
B3h—L—(h) Uy 3h-3-1 --  |PU of LIO In #1 192-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
P-Out 34-3-2 --  |PU of Divide 56-1,..,13-(12) (Exp)
Me=10 3h-3-3 NC -- Hold of Tape Selection Relays 183,184,185-1,..,9-(12) (Int)
3L-3=5 NC -- Hold of LG 201-1-(4)
3h—3-6 - =  |PU of SM-3 83-1,2-(12,4)
34-3-7 NC -- Hold of SM-3 83=-1,2-(12,4)
3h =3=8 --  |PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet (not used)
3h 3-9 Mell [Controls reset of PQ 47 col
3h-3 3-123 3h-h=k, M-10 |Hold
35-1, 02,46-(4) 8 Wy 35=45,46—1 NC Me PU of Shift 36-37,38,39-(12,12,4) (No shift)
Shift Pick-Up 35-45-13 35-43,44-1 NC D-1 {PU of Shift 36-34,35,36-(12,12,4) (Shift 1 col)
D-1 35-45 943-13 35-41,42-1 NC Del |PU of Shift 36-32,33-(12) (Shift 2 cols)
Mel 385k 213
35-45, -(2n + 1).,(47-2k)=1; Del  |PU of Shift 36-(36+2k) ,(37-2k)-(12,4,6 or 12) (Shift k cols)
35=(45~2k) ,(46-2k)—1 NC
Uysk $22
35-15, .(2n + 1).,(47-2k)-1; Del [PU of Shift 36-(23-k)-(4,6 or 12) (Shift k cols)
35=(45-2k) ,(46-2k)=1 NC
35en—h D-1 Hold
36-1,.+,39=(4,6 or 12) S 15 Controls shift of k cols to lefts; last two points read amount
Shift of shift to Q@Shift ctr
MeL k = 20,21,22
D-1 36-(23-k)-1,..,(25-k) Nu2 Hold is last point
154k 819 De2
36=(23-k)=1,.., (25k) M=2 Hold is 36-(23-k)-11
k=l, D=2
36~(23-k)=1,..,(25-k) M+2 [Hold is 36-(23-k)-12
83 ka 13 De2
36-(36-2k)<1, 205 Ma2 Hold is last point
36-(37-2k)-(13-k) D~2
342k<7
36—(36-2k)-1,.., M-2 [Hold is 36=(37-2k)-11
36~(37-2k)-(13-k) De2
k=2
3b-32—1 5 005 36—33—11 ue Hold is 36-33-12
D-

&&S
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
36<1,..,39-(4,6 or 12) 8 k=1
(continued 6-Shed,« 0436-35-12 M-2 | Hold is 36~36-4
- De2
36=37 91, oop 36~39=1 M~2 Hold is 36-39=2
: De2
37-1, ..,26-(4,6 or 12) D {16 A digit in col 1 of MP picks up 37=1,2-(12,4)
MF Cycle Control A digit in col 3 of MP picks up 37-3,4~-(12,4)
M-5 1s k S12 A digit in col (2k-1) of MP picks up 37-(k + 2)-(4,6 or 12)
in order to read to PQ col (2k-1) and up
37-1-1 Mu-5 = | PU of 29=1,2,3-(12,12,6) Column Shift Right
3134 M-5 «| PU of 29-4,5,6-(12,12,6) Column Shift Right
s12 ;
37-(k + 2)=1 M-5 [PU of 29~(3k-2),(3k-1), (3k)-(12,12,6) Column Shift Right
37-2 NC M-8 =| PU of Dy 67~1-(4)
A digit in col 2 of MP picks up 37-15,16-(12,4)
2$kKe1 A digit in col 2k of MP picks up 37-(k + 15)-(4,6 or 12)
in order to read to DD col 2k and up
37-16-1 M-5 «| PU of 21-1,2,3-(12,12,6) Column Shift Left
37=(k + 15)-1 M=5 «| PU of 21-(3k~2),(3k-1), (3k)~(12,12,6) Column Shift Left
37=26—2 NC Me8 PU of Co 66-1-(4)
B7—2yly-3$ 3755 00g 10-125 M-5 | Hold
37-11, 12-63 37-13, 1A-h3
37-23 ,2h63 37-25 ,26—L,
38-1,2,3-(12) 8 16 38-1-1,..,38-2-1 M-5 | PU of Column Shift Right 29-1,..,36-(12,12,6)
Multiply #2 M-8 =| PU of D, 67-1-(4)
M-O 38-2—2, 0+ ,38-3-1 M-§ |PU of COlum Shift Left 21-1,..,33-(12,12,6)
M-8 | PU of Co 66-1-(4)
38-3~3 N-O Controls read-in to Sequence ctr
383-5 M-7 | PU of F 18-1-(4)
38-36 Me5 Control Cycla ctr RO
38-3-7 M6 | PU of PQ Carry Control 24-1-(4
383-8 u-6 PU of DD Carry Control 27-1-(4
38~3-11 N-O Hold
39~1,2,3-(12) S 16 3921-1, 609392211 M=5 Control readin to MFP ctr and PU of MP Cycle Control
if In 37-1, 06,26-(4,6 or 12)
M~h 39=-2-12 M=5 PU of MD-DIV Control Pick-Up 13-1-(6) °
39-3-1 NC -- |Hold of X, Step Control 180-1-(6) (Int)
39-3-2 --  |PU of Sign Control #1 7on1- (4) (Int)
39-3-3 - =  |PU of SIO Reset 228-1,2,3-(12
39-3=4, -- Controls read-in to, log Cycle ctr
39-3=5 ~= {PU of LF 11~1,2-(6,4)
39-36 = + |Controls reset of etr (Int)
39-3-7 -- Controls read-in to Sine Sequence ctr #1
39=23=8 NC -= Hold of SIO Out #2 Control 237-1-(4)

39=3=9

PU of Forward Tape Clutch Magnet

Fes

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
39-1,2,3(12) 8 39=3-10 -- Controls readin to Xp ctr (Int)
(continued) 39=-3=11 MH4, Hold
39-3-12 -- PU of EIO 24th Col 9 225-1-6
40-1,2,3-(12) § 16 LOmL=1, 0059 M-10 | Controls read-in of 10's complements for MP reset
MP Reset 40-21, 6+ 540=3=11 M-10 | Controls read-in to MP ctr
MeH9 40=2-1, 66,40=3=11 NC M=5 Controls read-in to MP ctr
40=3~12 M=-9 Hold
4l=1,2-(12) S 16 Controls Sequence ctr RO
Multiply #1 4l-1-1 M-O | PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12)
M-O 41~-1~2 M-O | PU of DD-PQ Reset 581,..,8-(12)
4l-1-3 M-1 PU of MC=DR In 43-1,..,10=(12); 43-11,12=(4)
hl-1-4 M-1 PU of Intermediate Invert Control 94-1-(4)
4l-1~5 M-2 | PU of First Build Up 4hq1,..,5-(12)
41-16 M-2  |PU of First and Second Build Up 45-1,..,5-(12)
1-1-7 M=2 PU of Intermediate Reset 52=1,2,3=-(12); HD-4~(12)
4-1-8 Me3 | PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12)
41-1-9 M=3 PU of First and Second Build Up 45-1...,5=-(12)
41-1-10 M=3 | PU of Second Build up 46-1,..,5-(12)
41-1-11 M- =| PU of MP In 39-1,2,3-(12)
41-1~12 Mud, PU of Intermediate Invert Control 94-1-(4)
41-2-1 M-5 | PU of Intermediate Reset gram HD-4=(12)
41-2=2 M-10 | PU of Sequence Counter Reset 48-1-(12
41-2-3 M-10 | PU of P-Out 34-1,2,3-(12); 3h-4=(4)
4l-2-4 M-9 | PU of MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(12)3 HD~5-(12)
41-2=5 M-O | PU of Multiply #2 38-1,2,3-(12)
hl-2-6 Mel0 | PU of P-Out 3h-1,2-(1233 34-4~(4)
41-2-11 M-9 Hold
42-1,2,3-(12,12,4) 17 h2m1-1, ..42-2-3 == |Controls Sequence ctr RO (Log)
Ly L2—2=h, -- Hold of LE 10-1-(4)
h2—-2—5 NC = Controls Sequence. ctr reset (Log)
4 2—2—6 -- | PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
42—2=7 NC -- Controls RO of LIO 23rd col
42-2-8 -- PU of Multiply #2 38-1,2,3-(12) (Log)
42=2-9 NC -- |PU of Log In #2 190-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
422-10 ~- | PU of Log Sine P-Out 72~1,2,3~(12,12,4)
42—2-11 == Hold
42-212 -- |PU of Log Reset 191-1,2,3-(12)
42=3-2 -- Controls read-in to Log Cycle ctr
43-1, ..,;10-(12) $ 17 ABmlel, oo 5h3~2—11 Me2 Controls entry into MC-DR (1-2)
43-11-(4) S 16 De2
43-12-(4) S 15}. 43-2-12 M-l | PU of Shift 36-37,38,39-(12,12,4)
MC-DR In Del | PU of Shift 36-1,..,39-(4,6 or 12)
at 43-31, oo hB-heL. Ne2 Controls entry into MC-DR (3-6)
D- :

SEs
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
(contined)
43-1,..,10-(12) § 43-412 D-2 |PU of QShift Elusive One Control 87-1-(4)
43-11-(4) S N3—51, oo h3-6-11 Mu2 Controls entry into MC-DR (5)
43~12-(4) $ 43-6-12 M-2 [PU of Sign Control #1 70-1-(4)
MC-DR In 43-7-1, 0+ 43-8-11 W-2  |Controls entry into NC-DR x
M-1 43-9-1, ««y43~-10-11 M-2 Controls entry into MC-DR (9
Del 43-10-12 Mel Hold .
D-1
43-111 -- PU of SIO Out #2 Control 237-1-(4)
43-112 -- Controls read=in to Xp ctr (Int)
43-113 “= PU of Forward Tape Clitch Magnet (Int)
43-11-h M-2 PU of Sign Control. #2 71-1-(4)
4,3-12-1 M-1 PU of MC-DR Entry Control (1-2) 91-1,2,3-(12)
43-122 M-1 PU of MC-DR Entry Control (3-6) 92-1,2,3-(12)
43-12-34, M-1 Hold
D-1
Ab=L,..,5-(12) 8 17 Abmla1, os yhh-2-12 Ss) Control MC-DR times 2 RO to MC-DR (3-6)
First Build Up D-3
M=2 Han BL, oo hha -12 M3 Control MC-DR times 2 RO to MC-DR (9)
D2 D-3
Kha Se1 M-3 PU of Read Control Seq~31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
De3
hy 5a2 -- Controls read—in to Log Cycle ctr
bpm 55 “+ PU of SIO In #2 230-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
hyn 5—6 -- |PU of 7 278=1,2,3-(12,12,4) (Sine)
y= 5—7 -- Controls read-in to Sine Sequence ctr #1
hh=5=8 M-2  |PU of MC-DR Entry Control (3-6) 92=1,2,3+(12)
D2
Ah—5=9 ~- PU of Log Reset 191-1,2,3-(12)
4h=5-11 M2 Hold
D=-2
L5~1,.+,5-(12) 17 A5mLH1, «+ yh 52-12 M-3,4 {Control MC-DR times 2 RO to MC-DR (4-8)
First and Second Build Up D-3,4
Ma2 | A531, we ph Sehnl2 M-3,4 |Control MC-DR times Z RO to MC-DR (5)
De2 D344
45—5—1 M-3,4 |Controls MC-DR Carry Control 26~1-(4)
Du3 4
by 5m5a2 Ma2;3 Controls MC-DR Entry Control (4-8) 93-1,2,3-(12)
De2,3
Aba 5e3 -- Controls read=in to Sine Sequence ctr #2
45~-5-11 M-2 Hold
Dq2
h6~-1,..,5-(12) 17 AbnL=1L, »  946-2-12 M-4L |Control MC-DR times 6 RO to MC-DR (7)
Second Build Up Nb—3—1, oo hb—h—-12 MeL, Control MC-DR times 6 RO to MC-DR (9)

N-3

46-5]

Controls RO cf Log Cycle ctr

9e¢
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
L6-1,..,5-(12) § 46—5=2 NR-, | Controls read-in of 1 from Normalizing Register to
(continued) Intermediate ctr
L6-5=3 -- Controls RO of Sine Sequence ctr #1
46-54, -- |PU of SIO Out #3 272-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
h6~5-5 -- Controls entry of 1 into Intermediate ctr 21st col (Exp)
46-5~11 M-3 Hold
A7o1, + 0513-(12) S 17,18 | 47-1-1,..,47=-2-11 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (1-2)
MC-DR Reset . 47=2-12 M-10 | Controls reset of Cycle ctr
M-9 AT=3a1, 2. h7-h-12 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (3-6)
D=14 A751, 00 9h 76-12 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (4-8)
AT ~Ta1 yoo gh 7-812 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (5)
L7—Jol, oe 94 7-10-12 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (7)
A7all-1, 2547-12-12 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR (9)
47-13-1 NC M-2  |Hold of Sign Control #2 71-1-(4)
47-13-2 N-9 PU of MC-DR Entry Control (1-2) 91-1,2,3-(12)
47-13~3 M-9 | PU of MC-DR Entry Control (3-6) 92-1,2,3-(12)
47-134, ° M=9 =| PU of MC-DR Entry Control (4-8) 93-1,2,3=(12)
4,7-13-10,11,12 M-9 =| Hold
48-1-(12) 5 17 48-1-1 NC M-O Hold of Multiply #1 41-1,2-(12); Multiply #2 38-1,2,3-(12)
Sequence Counter Reset ; D-0 Hold of Divide 56-1,..,13-(12) .
M=10 ~- |Hold of LM 42-1,2,3-(12,12,4); LE 10-1-(4); LF 11-1,2-(6,4);
D-1y EX=2 55-1,2,3-(12,12,6)3 SM-l 81-1,2,3-(12,125h)3
Id-1 78-1,2,3=(12,12,4)}3 M2 79=1,2-(12,433 SM-5 85-1-(4)
48=1=2 M-1l | Controls Sequence ctr reset
4,8=1-3 -- | PU of Log In #2 190-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
8-1-4 ~- PU of EX=2 55-1,2,3-(12,12,6)
LB—1=5 -- Controls reset of Sine Sequence ctr #1
48-1-6 M-10 | Hold
48-1-7 -- PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet (Int)
48-1-8 Del4 | PU of Q-Shift 33-1,..,80=(4,6 or 12); H 20-1-(4)
49-1, 0«,10~(12) S 18 LGm1e2, 20h Ga2—12 M~3 Control Carry in MC-DR (3-6)
MC~DR Carry 9-3 = 2, 00h G-hn12 M-3 Control Carry in MC-DR (4-8)
M-3 9 5=25 06 yh 9-6—12 M3 Control Carry in MC-DR (5)
D-3 Nm T= 2 5 00 hI-8—12 M=3 | Control Carry in MC-DR {73
L9—9m2 5 6 5h 9-10-12 M-3 Control Carry in MC-DR (9
50-1,2,3-(12) § 18 50-1~1,..,50-2-12 M-1 | Control entry into Intermediate ctr
Intermediate In 50-3-1 M-1 | PU of Intermediate Carry Control 23-1-(4)
M-O 50-3~11 ¥-O Hold
D-O
51-1,2,3-(12) § 18 §l-1-1, ..,51-2-12 Control RO of Intermediate ctr (Int) (not used in MP=Div)

Intermediate Out

51-3-1
51-3=2
51-3-11

PU of EIO In 217-1,2,3+(12,12,h)
PU of IM-3 80-1-(45 (Int)
Hold .

LES
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
52-1,2,3-(12) 8 1s 52e1lH1, 0552-211 M-3 Control reset of Intermediate ctr cols 1-23
Intermediate Reset 52-2912 -- PU of C6 Step Control 223-1-(4) (Exp)

M2 523-1 “+ PU of C Value to Intermediate Control 90-1-(4) (Int)
Deed 52-302 -- PU of MC-DR Reset Control #2 238-1-(12) (Sine)
523-3 -- FU of Value Tape Read Clutch Magnet —
52u3—h NC -- Hold of IM-1 781,2,3-(12,12,4); IM-2 79-1,2-(12,4)
52-305 M=3 Controls reset of Intermediate ctr 24th col
52~3-6 NC M-2 Hold of Sign Control #1 W-1-(4)
52-3-7 M-3 Controls read~in to PQ 47th col
52=3-11 M~2 Hold
53~1,2-(12) 5 18 53-1-1, 0 6553-2-12 M1 Control carry into Intermediate ctr cols 1-24
Intermediate Carry
Mel
Sh-1-(12) 8 18 Shelal, 055 == Control Sequence ctr RO (Exp)
EX-1 5h-1-6 ~~ {PU of Multiply #2 38-1,2,3-(12) (Exp)
5h-1-7 -- |PU of EIO 1-18 Out 219-1,2-(12); BIO In 217-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
Sh-1-8 «= |PU of EX-2 55-1,2,3-(12,12,6)
54-1-9 NC -- PU of C-6 Step Control 223-1-(4.) (Exp)
5h4-1-11 “= Hold
55-1,2,3-(12,12,6) S 18 55m lal, oe 95 5~-2+3 ~- Control Sequence ctr RO (Exp)
EX-2 55 =2-h, - - |PU of Multiply #2 ere Cry (Exp)
55m 2—5 = PU of EIO 1-18 Out 219-1,2-(12
55=2—6 = Hold of EX-1 55-1-(12)
55—2—6 NC = Hold of XG 15-1=(4)
55a 2a] ~~ |PU of Ce6 Step Control 223-1-(4) (Exp)
5 5-2-8 - — |PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Exp)
55-2~9 NC -- Controls reset of Sequence ctr (Exp)
55~2-10 - - |PU of XG 15-1-(4)
55-2-11 » = |Hold of RO Control 226-l-(4); XH 220-1-(12)
55-212 ad Hold
55-3=1 = PU of MC-DR Reset 47-1,.-,13=-(12) (Exp)
5§5=3—2 NC PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
55-3-3 o- PU of Exp P-Out 73=1,2--(12)
5 5-3-6 oe Hold
56-1, .+,13-(12) S 19 56-l-1,..,56-2-12 NC M6 Control Linking of Times Left and Column Shift Left to DD ctr
Divide 56—3—1, .256-6-10 D-6 Control PU of DD compare 6-1,..,24-(12)
LO D7 Control read~in to DD ctr
Mn6 Control read-in to PQ ctr
5b—7ml, oe, 56-8-11 D-7 Control Q entry into PQ ctr
6-9-1, »(2n + L)syllyesy De6 | PU of Column Shift Right 29-1,..,36-(12,12,6)
56-10-11
56~9=2,.(2n) p12, ey p-@ | PU of Column Shift Left 21-1,..,36-(12,12,6)

56-10-19

ges

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
56-1,..,13-(12) 8 56-11-1 D-0 PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12)
(continued) 56-11-2 D-0 PU of DD-PQ Reset 58-1,..,8-(12)
56-11-3 D-1 Controls RO of Intermediate ctr 24th col 2nd midg
56-11-4 Del | PU of MC-DR In 43-1,..,10-(12); 43+11,12-(4)
56e11-5 Del PU of Q-Shift Invert 22-1-(12)
56-11-6 -D=1 PU of Intermediate Invert Control 94-1-(4)
56-l1-7 De2 | PU of First Build Up 44-1,..,5-(12)
56-11-8 De2 PU of First and Second Build Up 45=1,..,5-(12)
56-11-9 De2 PU of Intermediate Reset 52-1,2,3-(12)3 HD-4~(12)
56-11-10 D-3 PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3=(12)
56-11-11 D-3 | PU of First and Second Build Up 46~1,..,5-(12)
56~12=1 D-3 PU of Add-22 32-1-(4)
56=12-2 Deh Controls RO of Intermediate ctr 24th col 2nd mldg
56-12~3 Dey | PU of DD In 57-1,2,3-(12)
56-12—1, D-4 | PU of Intermediate Invert Control 94-1-(4)
56-1265 De5 PU of Intermediate Reset 52-1,2,3-(12)
56=12-6 Del, | PU of Sequence ctr Reset 48-1-(12)
56-12-7 D-1, | PU of MC-DR Reset 47=1,..,13-(12); HD~5-(12)
56-13~1 D-O Controls read=in to Sequence ctr .
56-13-2 De5 PU of Compare In 3=1,..,24-(12)3 3-25—(4)
D-6 | PU of MC-DR Invert HD-2-(12)
56-13~3 D-7 PU of Elusive One 60-1,.,,23—(4)
56-13-14, D-7 PU of DD Carry Control 27-1-(4)
56-13-5 De13 | PU of "9" 9-1-(4)
56-13-6 D-11 | PU of G 19-1-(4)
56-13-7 -- Controls RO of Cycle ctr after PU of G relay
56-13-8 -= Controls carry from doubling RO of MC-DR (1-2) 23rd col
56-13-9 Del, | PU of Q-Shift 33-1,..,80-(4,6 or 12); 9 20-1-(4)
56~13-11 D=O Hold
57=1,2,3-(12) § 19 5Jol-1, 0+ 57~2-11 D-5 | Control entry into DD ctr
DD In 57=2—12 De | PU of Shift 36-1,..,39-(4,6 or 12)
D-k 597~3-1 D=5 PU of Q-Shift Carry Control 25-1-(4)
57a 3~2 M=2 | PU of Sign Control #1 70-1-(4)
57-3-h, De5 PU of MP-DIV Control Pick-Up 13-1~(6)
57-3-11 Dk Hold
58-1,..,8-(12) § 19 58-1-1, ..,58=h~10 M-1 | Control PQ ctr reset
DD-PQ Reset 58-L-11,12 MO Hold
M-0 58a 5-1, 2, 588-9 M-1 Control DD ctr reset
D-O 5é~8~-10,11 D-1l | Control Q-Shift reset
58=8-12 M-0 Hold .
59=1,2,3-(12,12,6) S 19 59m1-1,..559=2=11 M~10 | Control DD cols 23-45 transfer to PQ
DD-PQ Transfer #2 59-3-1 M-10 | PU of PQ Carry Control 24-1-(4)
MH9 59-3~2 M-10 | PU of A 12-1,2-(4)3; B 16-1-(4)

68S
OFS

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
59-1,2,3-(12,12,6) 8 59+3=3 M-10 |Controls reset of Cycle ctr
(contimed) 59=-3-6 M-9 Hold
60-1, ..,23-(4) S 20 60-n=1 D-7 Controls entry of 1 into col n of DD ctr
Elusive One 60—=n=2 DoT Controls prevention of carry to the right in DD ctr
De? 60=n~4, D-7 Hold
6lw1,..,4-(12) § 20 61l-1-1,..,61-4-9 M-6 =|Control DD carry
DD Carry
U-6
D-7
62-1,..,4-(12) S 20 62-1-1, ..562-4-9 N-6 Control PQ carry
PQ Carry
M6
63-1-(4) D 10 63-1-1 D-11 |PU of F 18-1+(4)3 G 19-1-(4)
No Go 63=1-4 D-12 | Hold
D-12
6h—1-(4) S 12 6h—1-1 D-11 |PU of F 1@1=(4)
F Control 6h-1~4 D-11 | Hold
Del
65-1-(4) S 12 65-1-1 D-11 | PU of G 19=-1-(4)
G Control 65-1-4 D-11 | Hold
Dell
66-1-(4) D 13 66-1-1 M-S  |PU of DD-PQ ‘Transfer #1 7h-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
Co 66-1-4, MeB Hold
u=-8
67-1-(4) D 13 67-1-1 M-8 [PU of DD~PQ ‘lransfer #1 74~-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
De 67-1~h, M=8 Hold
u-8
68-1-(4) D 13 68~1-2 M-6 = |Controls carry to PQ 23rd col
PQ anrd Column 68=1=4 M-6 Hold
Ne
6941,2~(4) 8 wu 69-1-1 M-9 =| PU of C 30-1-(12); D 31-1-(12)
CD Control 69-1-2 N-6 PU of PQ 23rd Column 68-1-(4)
N-9 69-1-3 M-8 | Hold of Cy 66-1-(4); Dz 67-1-(4)
69-1-4, U-9 Hold
69=2-1,2 NC M5 PU of MP=DIV Control Hold 14-1-(12); Column Shift Left
. Q1-1,..,27-(12,12,6); Column Shift Right 29-1,..,27-(12,12,6)
M6 PU of E 17-1~(4
M-7 PU of F 18-1-(4
8

PU of Co 66-1-(4)3 Do 67-1-(4)
Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
70-1-(4) D 19 70-1-1 MH3 Controls read-in to PQ 47th col
Sign Control #1 Wa1-2 Me2 PU of Sign Control #2 71-1-(4)
M-2 T0-l=l, M-2 Hold
71-1-(4) D 20 7l-1-1; 71-1-2,3 NC M-11 |Control reset of PQ 47th col
Sign Control #2 Tl=le4 M-2 Hold
Meu2
72-1,2,3-(12,12,h) $ 21 Walal, .2572-2-12 -- [Control RO of PQ ctr (Log-Sine)
Log Sine P-Out 72=3-h, -~- |Hold
73~-1,2-(12) 8 21 T3—1-1, e039 13-29 -- Control RO of PQ ctr (Exp)
Exp P-Out 73—2-12 -- Hold
Thml.y2,3-(12,12,4) D 21 Thelel, .+,7h-2-10 M-9 Control DD cols 1-22 transfer to PQ
DD-PQ Transfer #1 TWhe2=11 M-9 PU of CD Control 69-1,2=(4)
M-8 The3-1 M-9 PU of PQ Carry Control 24~1-(4)
The-3-h N-8 Hold
75-1,2,3=(12,12,4) 8 yal TWel-1, .0y75=—2-12 -- Control read-in of C Value to Intermediate ctr
c Value to Intermediate 75-3-L, -- Hold
1
76-1,2,3-(12,12,4) 8 21 Tbmlel,.6,76-2-12 -- Control read-in of C Value to Intermediate ctr
c vee to Intermediate T6-3=h = Hold
2
77-1,2,3~(12,12,4) 8 21 Talal, .6577-2-12 -- Control read-in of C Value to Intermediate ctr
C Value to Intermediate T7a3-h -- Hold
#3
7891,2,3-(12,12,4) S 21 781-1, 0.5 78-2-h -- Control RO of Sequerme ctr (Int)
IM-1 Tbm2—5 -- Controls Forward Tape Clutch Magnet
18-2-6 -- Controls read-in to ctr (Int)
7182-7 -~- |PU of Multiply #2 38~1,2,3-(12) (Int)
182-8 NC -- Controls Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
78-2-9 -- Hold of Step Control 180=1=(6)
78=2-10 --+ Controls teset of Sequence ctr to 4 (Int)
78-2-11 -~- |Hold; hold of IM-2 79=1,2-(12,4)
78=2~12 -- PU of C Value to Intermediate Control 90-1~(4)
8-3-1 -~-  |PU of IM-2 79-1,2-(12,4)
78~3m2 == |PU of P-Out 34-1,2,4-(12,12,4) (Int)
18=3<h, - = Hold
19=1,2-(12,4) D 21 79=1-1,2,3 --  |Control Sequence ctr RO (Int)
IN-2 719-1, NC -- Controls read-in to Xp ctr
19-1-5 -- Controls Xn reset
719-1-6 ~- |PU of MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(12) (Int) °

TPS
Relay Rew Contact Cycle Function
T9-1,2—(12,4) D 19=1=7 -- PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
(continued) T9-1-8 -- |Controls Forward Tape Clutch Magnet
719-1-9 NC -- Hold of X, Step Control 160-1-(4)
79-1-10 NC -- [Controls reset of Sequence ctr to 0 (Int)
791-11. NC -- |Hold; hold of Il-l 78-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
19=1-12 -—- PU of IN-3 80-1-(4)
79=2—1 NC -~- |Hold of Tape Selection Relays 183, 184, 185-1,..,9--(12)
19-2-h, -- Hold
80--1-(4) S 21 80-1-1 -- Controls Sequence ctr reset (Int)
IN-3 80~l-h, ~- Hold
81--1,2,3-(12,12,4) 8 21 8l-l~1,..,81-2+3 -- Control Sequence ctr RO (Sine)
SM=1 81-2-4 -- Hold of SM—1; Multiply #2 38-1,2 3-(12) (Sine)
81-2-5 -- | PU of MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(125 (Sine)
81-2-6 -- PU of Sine Sequence ctr #2 RO Control 237-1-(4)
81-2-8 =~ - | PU of Multiply #2 38-1,2,3-(12) (Sine)
81-2-9 NC -- PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
| 81~-2-10 -- Controls read=in to Sine Sequence ctr #2
| 81-21), NC -- Controls reset of Sine Sequence ctr #2
81-2-12 -- |Hold
81-3-1 NC -- PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
81-3-2 NC == Controls RO of SIO 24th col
82-1-(12) D 21 2-1-1 NC -- Cong noe Prevention of PU of Intermediate Reset 52-1,2,3-(12)
SM~2 Sine
82-1-2 -- Controls prevention of PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12)
Sine
82-1-3 -- | PU of Intermediate in 50-1,2,3-(12) (Sine)
B2—1-i -- Controls Sequence ctr reset to 1 (Sine)
82-1-5 -- | PU of SM-3 ‘83-1, 2-(12,4)
S2=1-6 NC -- Controls read~in to Sine Sequence ctr #2
82=1-7 NC -- |Hold of @, 7 and 5 233,234,235-1-(6)
821-8 -- |Hold for 305 236-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
| 82-1-9 NC -- Controls readin of sign to PQ 47th col (Sine)
821-1) NC -- |PU of ,7 and § 233,234,235-1-(6)
82-1-12 -- [Hold
83-1,2-(12,4) S val 83-1-1 NC ~~ |Control prevention of PU of MC~DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(12) (Sine)
SM~3 83-1-2 -~+ | PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Sine)
83-1-3 ~~ |PU of DD-PQ reset 581,..,6-(12) (Sine)
83=Lal, -- Controls Sequence ctr reset to 4 (Sine)
831-5 = - | Hold of .785 236-1,2,3-(12,12,4); MC-DR Reset Control #1
239~1-(4); MC-DR Reset Control #2 238-1-(12) (Sine)
| 83~1-6 NC -- Controls readin to Sine Sequence ctr #2
3-1-7 ~- Hold of SM~2 $2~1-(12)
83-1-8 -- Controls read-in to Sine Sequence ctr #1

83-1-9

Hold

cbs

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
83-1,2~(12,4) S 83~1-10 -- PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3~(12) (Sine)
(continued) 83+1-11 Nc -- |PU of 8, 7and 8 233,234,235-1-(6)
83-1~12 -- Hold
83~-2-1 -- Hold of 8, 7 and 8 233,234,235-1~(6); Sine RO Control
240-1-(4,
83-23 -~- |PU of SIO Reset 228-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
84-1-(6) S 21 8-1-1 NC -~+ Controls Sequence ctr (Sine)
SM-4 84-1-2 NC + -  |Controls prevention of PU of DD-PQ Reset 581,..,8~-(12) (Sine)
8L-1-3 ~- |PU of 4/2 279-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
8L-1-4 -- PU of SIO Invert 242-1~(12)
ah-1~-6 -- Hold
tJ
85-1-(4) D 21 5-1-1 - =  |PU of Log Sine P-Out 72-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
SM-5
86-1-(4) D 13 86-1-1,2 NC D-4 | Controls addition from Log "N" Switches to Q-Shift ctr
Add=22 Control 86~1-L, -- Hold
87-1-(4) 8 15 87=1-1 D-2  |PU of Q-Shift Elusive One 88-1-(4)
Q-Shift Elusive One oy D-2 Hold
Control
D-2
88-1-(4) S 15 88-1-1,2 De2 Control read-in of Elusive One to Q-Shift ctr
Q-Shift Elusive One
D2
89-1-(4) S 19 89~1-1 M-2 | PU of Sine Control #1 70-1-(4)
Intermediate 24th col 89-142 -- Controls RO of Intermediate ctr 24th col
Read-Out Control
Me1
90-1=(4) D 18 90-1-1,2 ~+- |PU of Intermediate In 50-1,2,3-(12) (Int)
C Value to Intermediate 90-1-1, -- Hold
Control
91-1,2,3-(12) § 1 91-1-1 N-3 Controls circuit to MC-DR col 1 2nd mldg
MC~DR Entry Control 91-1-2, ..,91-2-11 M-3 Control circuit to MC-DR col 2-23 3rd midg
(1-2) 91-3-1 M-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 1-6
Mel 91+3~-2 M-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 7-12
91-3=3 M=3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 13-18
91-3-L, M-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 19=23
91-35 M~3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 1-6
91-3-6 M-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 7-12
91-3-7 M-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 13-18
91-3-8 M-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 19-23
91-312 M-1 | Hold

brs

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
92~1,2,%-(12) S 2 92-1-1 M-3 Controls circuit to MC~DR col 1 2nd midg
MC-DR Entry Control 92-1-2 yoy 922-12 MH3 Control circuit to MC-DR col 2-2) 3rd midg
(3-6) 92-3-1 M=3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 1-6
M~1 92=3=2 N~3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mlidg cols 7~12
92-+3~3 N-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 13-18
92-3-L, Na3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 19-24
92—3=5 M-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 1-6
92-3-6 N~3 Controls circuit of $ impulse to 3rd mldg cols 7-12
92-3-7 N-3 Controls circuit of & impulse to 3rd midg cols 13-18
92=-3=8 M-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 19-24
92-3~12 Me1 Hold
94~1,2,3-(12) 8 3 93-1-1 M-3 Controls circuit to MC-DR col 1 2nd midg
MC-DR Entry Control 93-1-2, ..,93-2-12 M-3 Control circuit to MC-DR col 2-24 3rd mldg
(4-8) 93-3-1 M-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd midg cols 1-6
Med 93 <3<2 Me3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 7-12
93-3-3 M~3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 13-18
93-3-h M-3 Controls circuit of 1 impulse to 3rd midg cols 19-24
93-3=5 M~3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd midg cols 1-6
93-3-6 M3, Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 7-12
93-3=7 N-3 Controls circuit of 8 impulse to 3rd mldg cols 13-18
93-3-8 N-3 Controls circuit of & impulse to 3rd mldg cols 19-24
93-3-12 M-1 Hold
94-1-(4) 8 21 We1-1,2 M-1 PU of Intermediate Invert HD-1-(12)
Intermediate Invert 9L~-l-h M-1 Hold
Control
Me-1
9§-1-(6) 8 18 95-1-1 -- |PU of "9" relay 9-1-(4)
Place Limitation (643) 95-1-6 -- Hold
96-1-(6) S 18 96~1~-1. -- PU of "9" relay 9-1-(4)
Place Limitation (6431) 96-1-6 -- | Hold
Fle1-(6) S 18 97~-1-1. PU of "9" relay 9=1-(4)
Place Limitation (6432) 97-1-6 -- Hold
98-1-(6) S 18 98-1-1 - PU of "9" yelay 9-1-(4)
Place Limitation (64321) 98-1-6 -- Hold
99=1,2,3-(12,12,4) 8 22 99~1-1,..,99-2~11 ~-  |Control RO of PQ cols 1-23 to Buss cols 1-23
Special PQ-Out ~ 99-2-12 ; M12 |Controls reading 9 to Buss col 24 if PQ <0
Mell (Low order RO) 99-3—1,2 M~11 | PU of DD-PQ Invert HD-3=-(12); HD-3-(4) we
99=3=h, M-11 | Hold

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
100-1-(4) D 22 100-1-1,2 Mell |PU of DD-PQ Invert. HD-3-(12); HD-3-(4) we
Special Sign 100-1-h M-11 | Hold
M-1l (Low order RO)
101-1,2-(12) s 22 101-1-1, ..,101-2-11 NR-2 |PU of Digit Sensing 102-1,..,23=(4)
Normalizing Register 101-2-12 NR=2 | Hold
Read-In
Norm. Reg.-2
102-1,..,23-(4) D 22 LSn $23
Digit Sensing 102=n-1 NR-3 | PU of Shift Positioning 103-1,..,23-(4)
Norm. Reg.-3 102-n-4, NR-3 | Hold
103-1, ..,23=(4) S 22 0 Sn S22
Shift Positioning 103-(n + 1)-1 NR=-3 | Controls reading of 1 to column (n+ 1) of Intermediate ctr
Norm, Reg.-3 103-(n + 1)-2,3 NR-4 {Controls reading amount of shift n to cols 20 and 21 of Buss
103-(n + 1)=-4 NR=3 | Hold .
104-1-(4) S 22 104-1-1,2 NR-4 |Controls reading of amount of shift to cols 20 and 21 of Buss
Normalizing Register RO 104-1-4 NR-4 | Hold
Norm. Reg.-4
HEAVY DUTY RELAYS
HD=1-(12) HD~1-1,..,10 Me2 Control inverted RO of Intermediate ctr
Intermediate Invert HD=-1-12 MeL Hold ;
M=1
HD=2-(12) HD-2=1,..,10 D-7 Control inverted RO of MC-DR ctrs
MC-DR Invert HD=2=11 D-11 |PU of F 18-1-(4)
D-6 HD-2=-12 D=6 Hold
HD~3—(12) HD-3-1,..,10 M-11 [Control inverted RO of DD-PQ ctrs
HD-3-(4) we HD=$3-11 D-15 {Controls RO of 9 from PQ 47th col if PQ<0
DD=PQ Thvert HD-3-12 M-11 | Hold
M-11 HD-3-1 we M-12 |Controls RO of 9 from PQ 47th col if PQ <0 (Special RO cols
1-23 of PQ) .
HD-4—(12) HD-h-1, 2059 M-3 Control reset of Intermediate ctr
Intermediate Reset
Me2
HD~5~(12) HD=5=1, 259 M-10 | Control reset of MC-DR ctrs
MC-DR Reset
M-9

SPS
OFS

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
HD-6-(12) HD-6-1,..,9 M-l [Control reset of DD, PQ and Q-Shift ctrs
DD-PQ Reset

M-O0
SEQUENCE RELAYS

Seq-8-(4) Seq-8-1,2 PU of Check relay~(4)
Check Control Seq=8=3 Hold
Seq-10-(4) Seq-10~1 PU of Invert relay-(12) for minus absolute RO
Storage RO Minus Seq-10-4, Hold
Seqe-11-(4) Seq-ll-1 PU of Invert relay-(12) for plus absolute RO
Storage RO Plus Seq-ll=4, Hold
Seq-27-(4) Seq-27=1 PU of Start Seq-33~(4)3 Hold of Start Interlock Seq-28-(4)
Repeat Seqe27-2 PU of Start Seq-33~(4)

Seq-27-4 Hold
Seq-28-(4) Seq=28-1 NC PU of Start Seq-33~(4)
Start Interlock Seqe2b=h Hold
Seq-29-(12) Seq-29-1, 2-59 Control 9's complement for inverted IVS RO
IVS Invert Seqe29-12 Hold
Seq-30-1,2,3—(12,12,4) Seq-3C+1-1l, .2512 Control RO of IVS cols 1-12
IVS Out Seq-30-2-1,..,12 Control RO of IVS cols 13-24

Sequ30~3—h, Hold

Seq-31~(4)
Read Control

Seq-32-(4)
Stop Control

Seq-33-(4)
Start

Seq-31-1,2,3,4

Seq-32-1,2 NC
Seq-32-4,

Seq-33-1
Seq~33-3
Seq-33—4

Control reading of control tape through reading pina

PU of Read Control Seq-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
Hold

PU of Read Control Seq=-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
PU of Start Interlock Seq-28~(4)
Hold

SWITCH RELAYS

SwA-1,2,3=(12,12,4)
Switch A Out

SwA-1-1,..,12
SwA=2—1,..,12
5wA-3-4

Control RO of Switch A cols 1-12
Control RO of Switch A cols 13-24
Hold

Relay

Row

Contact

Cycle

Funetion

Switeh Invert-(12)

Sw Invert-1,..,9
Sw Invert~11

Controls 9's complement for inverted RO
Hold

STORAGE

COUNTER RELAYS

SCA-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
Storage Counter Out

SCA-4,5,6-(12,12,4)
Storage Counter In

SCA~7, 8~(12)
Storage Counter Carry

SCA-9-(4.)
Storage Counter Carry
Control

SCA~10~(4,)
Storage Counter 24th Col
Carry (10)

SCA=-11~(4)
Storage Counter 24th Col
Carry (9)

SCA~12,13-(4)

Storage Counter Carry
Booster

Storage Counter Invert-(12)

SCA~1+1,..,12
SCA=2-1,..,12
SCA=3=1
SCA+3-2
SCA-3-3
SCA-3-4,

SCA~h-1, 512
SCA~5-1,..,12
SCA~6-1
SCA~6-2
SCA~6=h,

SCA-7+1,..,12
SCA~8-1,..,12

SCA-9-1
SCA=9-2
SCA~9mh,

SCA-10-1

SCA-l1-1
SCA~-l1~2

SCA~12-2,3
SCA-13-2,3

Invert-1,..,9
Invert-10 NC

Control RO of cols 1-12

Control RO of cols 13-24

PU of Str Ctr 24th Col Carry (relays 10 and 11)
PU of Str Ctr Reset relay-(12)

PU of Str Ctr Invert relay-(12)

Hold

Control read-in of cols 1-12

Control read-in of cols 13-24

PU of Str Ctr Carry Control SCA-9-(4)
PU of Str Ctr Reset-(12)

Hold

Control Carry for cols 1-12
Control Carry for cols 13-24

PU of Str Ctr Carry (relays 7 and 8)
PU of Str Ctr 24th Col Carry (relays 10 and 11)
Hold

Controls end around carry through 10

Controls end around carry through 9
PU of Str Ctr Invert relay-(12)

Control carry booster to col 1
Control carry booster to col 13

Control 9's complement for inverted RO
NC and Transfer paralleled to "9" spot

Invert-12 Hold
Storage Counter Reset~(12) Reset-1,..59 Control 10's complement for reset of str ctr
Reset~10 Controls prevention of carry impulse during reset
Reset=11 NC NC and Transfer paralleled to "9" spot
Reset~-12 Hold
Sp6h4—(4) Sp64-1 Hold PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC64-4,5,6-(12,12,4)
Special 64 In Sp64-3 PU of Carry Interlock-1-(6)
Spbh-4, Hold

L¥S

Relay Row Contact Cycle Function
Sp65-(4) Sp65-1 Hold; PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC65-4,5,6-(12,12,4)
Special 65 In 8p65-3 PU of Carry Interlock-1-(6)
Sp65-4 Hold
Sp68~(4) Sp68~1 Hold; PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC68-4,5,6-(12,12,4)
Special 68 In Sp68-3 PU of Carry Interlock-2-(6)
Sp68-4, Hold
Sp69=(4) Sp69-1 Hold; PU of Normal Str Ctr In S8C69-4,5,6-(12,12,4)
Special 69 In Sp69-3 PU of Carry Interlock-2-(6)
S5p69-4 Hold
Carry Interlock-1-(6) CI~-1-1,3 Control end around carry from col 24 of ctr 65 to col 1 etr 64
CI~1-3 Controls carry from col 23 of ctr 65 to col 24 of ctr 64
CI~1~4 Controls carry from col 23 of ctr 64 to col 1 of ctr 65
CI#1-5 PU of Carry Control SC64=9-(4) or SC65=9=(4) ©
CI-1=6 Hold
Carry Interlock-2-(6) CI-2-1,2 Control end around carry from col 24 of ctr 69 to col 1 etr 68
CI-2-3 Controls carry from col 23 of ctr 69 to col 24 of ctr 68
CI-2-4, Controls carry from col 23 of ctr 68 to col 1 of ctr 69
C1-2=5 PU of Carry Control SC68-9-(4) or SC69-9-(4)
CI-2-6 Hold
Choice=(6) Choices PU of 24th Col 9 SC70-11-(4)
Choice-2 PU of Str Ctr Invert--(12)
Choice-6 Holds PU of 24th Col 9 SC70-11-(4)
SC71-14-(6) SC71-14-1 PU of Normal Str Ctr Out SC71-1-(12)
Normal. Out Control SC71-1y-2 PU of Normal Str Ctr Cut SC’71~2~(12)
SC71-1y--3 PU of Normal Str Ctr Out SC71-3-(4)
SC71=14--6 Hold
$071-15-(6) SC71=15-1 PU of Normal Str Ctr Out SC71-2-(12)
Special Out (direct) SC71-15--2 PU of Normal Str Ctr Out SC71-3-(4)
S8C71-15:-6 Hold
SC71-16-(6) SC71-16--1 PU of Normal Str Ctr In 8C71~4-(12)
Normal In Control SC71-16-2 PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC71-5-(12)
SC71-16.-3 PU of Normal Str Ctr In 8C71-6-(4)
SC71-16--6 Hold
8C71-17~(6) SC71-17--1 PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC71~5—(12)
Special In (direct) 8C71-17--2 PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC71-~6-(4)
SC71=17-+3 PU of Carry Back Control SC71-20-(6)

SC71~17-6

Hold

8FS

Relay

Row

Contact

Cycle

Function

SC71+18-1, 2-(12

6)
Special Out (shifted)

SC71-19=1,2=(12,6)

Special In (shifted)

SC71-20~(6)

Carry Back Control

Check-(4)

SC71-16-1-1,..,12

SC71-16~2-1
SC71-18-2-6

SC71-19-1-1,..,12
$C71-19-2-1
SC71-19-2-2
SC71-19-2-6

SC71-20-1
SC71-20-1 NC
SC'71~20~6

Check~1
Check-4

Control RO of ctr 71 cols 13-24 to Buss cols 1-12
PU of Normal Str Ctr Out SC71~3-(4)
Hold

Control read-in to ctr 71 cols 13-24 from Buss cols 1-12
PU of Normal Str Ctr In SC71-6-(4)

PU of Carry Back Control SC'71~20-(6)

Hold

Controls carry back in ctr 71 from col 24 to col 13
Controls carry back in ctr 71 from col. 24 to col 1
Hold ;

PU of Read Control Seq~-31-(4) and Clutch Magnet
Hold

65S
CAM CONTACTS

oss

Cam Make Break Function Cam Make Break Function
cC+1 1/16 1 | 1 5/8 1 dmpulse control CC=25 3 Wy Hold of PQ 23rd Column 6&1-(4)
Cc-2 1/16 2 | 2 5/8 2 impulse control CC=26 2 11/3 | PU of aD Iy ,gontvol Pick-Up
13-1-
cc=3 1/16 3 | 3 5/8 3 impulse control CD Control 69-1,2-(4)
cc-h 1/16 4h | 4 5/8 | 4& impulse control CC-27 9 12 Hold of DR Compare 2-1,..,120-(4)
cC=5 1/16 5 | 5 5/8 5 impulse control CC=28 9 12 Hold of DD Compare 6-1,.«,24—-(12)
DR Compare 2-121,..,216-(4)
cc-6 1/16 6 | 6 5/8 6 impulse control
CC~29 6 8 | Hold of A 12=1,2-(4)
CC-7 1/16 7 | 7 5/8 7 impulse control B 16-1-(4)
PU of Sign Control #2 71-1--(4,)
CC-30 1/16 3 1 | Hold of Co 66-1-(4)
cc-8 1/16 8 | 8 5/8 | & impulse control (69-1-3 NC) Dy 67-1~(4)
cC~9 1/16 9 | 9 5/8 9 impulse control CC-31 12 1/2 9 PU of Times Right
PU of Sign Control #1 70-1--(4) Shsie 27~(12,12,4)
F 18-1-(4
CO=1, 059 PU of DD Compare 6-1, ..,2h-(12) G re-a-(i}
DR Compare 21,..,216-(4)
CC=32 81/2 2 | Hold of MP-DIV Control Hold
cC=10 (0) 01/2 | Controls impulse to Seq Ctr Magnet | (12-1,2-2 NC) Yer G2)
F 18=1-(4
CC=12 12 12 1/2 | Controls carry impulse G 19-1-(4)
cC-15 15 15 1/2 | 15 impulse control CC-33 A 15 1/3} PU of Shift 36-1,..,39-(4,6 or 12)
C 30-1-(12
cc-15 16 16 1/2 | 16 impulse control D 31-1~(12
Q-Shift 33-1,..,80-(4,6 or 12)
CC~-17 L L 5/8 | CB make 16 points H 20-1-(4)
DD=PQ Invert HD~3-(12);
cC-19 L L 5/8 | CB make 16 points HD-3=(4) we
CC=21 1/16 L | L 1/2 | CB break 16 points CC=34 9 12 | Hold of Over Under 1-1,..,235-(4)
C0~23 1/16 L | L1/2 | CB break 16 points CC=35 9 12 | Hold of Over Under 1-236,..,423-(4)
Digit Sensing 102-1,..,23-(4)
CC=24A L1/h | 17/8 | Compare control make
CC=36 12 O | Hold of Column Shift Right
CC=24B L/h | L 7/8 | Compare control make 291, 005 36—(12,12,6)
Column Shift Left
CC=24C L 1/16 | L 3/4 | Compare control break 21-1, ..,36—(12,12,6)
Times Right 5-1, ..,27--(12,12,4)
CC=24,D L 1/16 | L 3/4 Compare control break Times Left 4-1,..,27-(12,12,4)

E 1?-1-(4)

CAM CONTACTS

Cam Make Break Function Cam Make Break Function
CC-37 l 1/4 12 | PU of Q-Control 7-1,..,9-(4) CC+43 Shift 36-1, ..,39-(4,6 or 12)
No Go 63-1-(4) (continued) Intermediate Reset
Shift Positioning 52-1,2,3+(12)
103-1, ..,23-(4) Intermediate Reset HD~4~(12)
First Build Up
CC+38 11 1/2 9 Hold of C 30=1-(12) Ahm1,..,5-(12)
D 32-1-(12) First and Second Build Up
Q-Control 7-1,..,9-(4) 45-1, ..,5-(12)
No Go 63-1-(45 Second Build Up 6-2, ..5-(12)
MP In 39-1, 2,3-(12 )
CC-39 1/3 15 12 Hold of Compare In 3-1,..,24-(12); DD~PQ Transfer #21
3~25-(4) Thel,2,3-(12,12,4)
MC~DR Invert HD-2-(12) DD-FQ Transfer #2
59~1,2,3-(12,12,6)
CC-40 1/16 15 9 PU of DD-PQ Transfer #1 MP Reset 40-1, 2,3=(12)
Theol, 2,3-(12,12,4) UC-DR Reset 47=1y++,13-(12)
DD=PQ Transfer #2 P-Out 3he1,2,3=(12)3 3h-h= (4)
59=1,2,3-(12,12,6) Sequence Counter Reset.
MP Reset i,0-1,2,3-(12) 48~1-(12)
MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13-(12) DD=PQ Invert HD=3~(12);
DD=PQ Invert HD-3-(12); HD--3-(4.) we
HD-3-(4) we Q-Shift Invert 22-1-(12)
Compare In 3-1,..,24-(12); Add-22 32-1-(4)
3-25-(4) DD In 57-1,2,3-(12)
MC=DR Invert HD-2-(12) Q-Shift 33-1, ++,80=(4,6 or 12)
Log Sine P-Out ; H 20-1-(4)
72=1,2,3-(12,12,4) Normalizing Register Read-In
Special Sign 100-]-(4) 101-1,2-(12
Normalizing Register Read—Out
CC-41 12 15 Hold of MP Cycle Control 104—-1=(4)
(30-1-1,2 NC) 37=1, 00 26-(4,6 or 12)
(30-1-8,9 NC) CC-hL 2° | 11/3 | PU of Intermediate Carry Control
(31-1-1,2 NC) 23-1-(4,)
(31-1-8,9 NC) MC-DR Carry Control 26-1-(4)
PQ Carry Control 24-1-(4)
CC=42 12 1/3 16 | Hold of Shift Pick-Up DD Carry Control 27=1-(4)
3515. 0,hb—(4) ashart Elusive One Control
=1~(4,
CC+43 12 fe) Hold of Intermediate In Q-Shift Carry Control 25-1-(4)
50-1,2,3-(12) Elusive One 60-1,..,23-(4)
DD=PQ Reset 58-1,..,8-(12) F Control 64-1-(4) °
Intermediate Invert Control G Control 65~1-(4)
9h-1~(4) non 9~1—(4)
Intermediate Invert HD-1-(12)
MC-DR In 43-1,..,10-(12); CO-45 1/16 11] 13 | PU of Intermediate Carry

43-11,12-(4)

53-1, 2-(12)

ISS

CAM CONTACTS

GSS

Cam Make Break Function Cam Make Break Function
CC-45 MC-DR Carry 49=1,..,10-(12) CC-53 ie 16 Hold of Divide 56-1,..,13-(12)
(contimed) PQ Carry 62=1,..,4-(12 (199-1-1 NC)
DD Carry 61-1,..,4-(12
Q-Shift Elueive One 88-1-(4) CC=54 12 12 1/2 | Controls impulse to cycile ctr
Q-Shift Carry 28-1-(4) magnet
CC=46 2 13 1/3] Hold of Intermediate Carry Control. | CC-55 12 1/2 | 13 2/3 | Controls Sequence ctr RO-B
23—1-(4) PU of Intermediate In
MC-DR Carry Control 26-1-(4) 50-1,2,3-(12)
PQ Carry Control 24-1-(4) First Build Up 44-1,..,5-(12)
DD Carry Control 27-1-(4) MP~In. 39-1,2,3~(12)
Q-Shift Elusive One Control Sequence ctr Reset 48-1-(12)
87-1--(4,) Shift Pick-Up 35=1,..,46=(4)
Q-Shift Carry Control 25-1-(4)
Elusive One 60-1,..,23-(4) CC-56 12 1/2 | 13 2/3 | Controls Sequence ctr RO-C
F Control 64-1-(4 PU of MC-DR In 43-1,..,10-(12);
G Control 65~1-(4 43-11,12=(4)
First and Second Buiid Up
CC-47 31/2 16 Hold of MP--DIV Control Pick-Up L5=1, .,5-(12)
13-1--(6) MC-DR Reset 47-1,..,13+(12)
CD Control 69-1,2-(4) Q-Shift Invert 22-1-(12)
Special Sign 100-1-(4) DD-In 57=+1,2,3-(12)
CC-48 2 L Hold of "9" 9=1-(4) CC+57 12 1/2 | 13 2/3 | Controle Sequence ctr RO-D
PU of DD-PQ Reset 58-1,..,8(12)
CC-A9 1 01/3 PU of Multiply #2 381,2,3-(12) Intermediate Invert Control
> 9h-1=(4,
cC-50 1/3 3 16 Hold of XG 15=1-(4) Intermediate Reset
(55-2-6 NC) EX=1 5h--1-(12) 52-1,2,3-(12)
Second Build Up 46-1,..,5-(12)
CC-51 2 11/3 | PU of LE 10-1-(4) P-Out 3h4~1,2,3-(12)3 34-4-(4)
LF 1l-1,2-(6,4) Add-22 32-1-(4)
XG 15~1+(4)
EX-2 55-1,2,3-(12,12,6) cc-58 Wy 15 1/3 | PU of MP-DIV Control Hold 14-1-(12)
Column Shift Right
cc~52 1/3 3 16 Hold of Multiply #1 41~-1,2-(12) 29-1, .»,36-(12,12,6)
(8-1-1 NC) Multiply #2 38-1,2,3~(12) E 17-1-(h)
Divide 56-1,..,13-(12) D, 67-1-(4)
LE 10-1--(4)
LF L~1,2-(6,4) CC-59 uy 15 1/3 | PU of Column Shift Left
Li 42=1,2,3-(12,12,h) Q~1L, .«,36~(12, 12, 6)
EX=2 55-1,2,3-(12,12,6) Cy 6-1-(4$
IM-1 78--1,2,3-(12,12,4)
IM-2 7199, 2-(12 yh) cc-60 6 51/3 | PU of A 12=1,2=(4)
SM-1 81--1,2,3-(12,12,h) B lé-1- 4}
SMH5 85--1—(4) G 19-1-(4

Shift Positioning 103-1,..,23-(4)

CAM CONTACTS

Cam

Make Break Function Cam Make Break Function
cc-61 12 ie) PU of Intermediate Reset HD-4-(12) | CC~76 15 16 1/3 | PU of MC-DR mt sontrod (1-2)
91-1,2,3-(12
C062 uy 0 | PU of DD-PQ Reset HD-6-(12) MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
92-1,2,3-(12
co-63 r) 0 | PU of MC+DR Reset HD-5-(12) MC-DR Entry Contrel (4-8)
; 93-1,2,3-(12)
CO-64, 4 12 PU of EIO Reset 218-1,2,3-(12) EIO In 217-1, 2,3-(12,12,4)
EIO 1-18 Out 219-1,2-(12)
CC-65 2 15 3/4 | PU and hold of SM-4 84-1-(6)
CC-77 16 0 Hold of HC-DR Entry Control (1~2)
CC-66 2 11/3 | PU and hold of SN-3 8351,2- (2) 91-1,2,3-(12)
PU of C6-0 Step Control 223-1-(4 MC-DR Entry Control (3-6)
92~1,2,3-(12
CCH67 15 | 16 1/3 | PU of log C values MC-DR Entry Control (4-8)
210-1, ..,6=(24,28) 93~1,2,3-(12)
cc-68 wy 15 1/3 | PU of SIO Out #2 Control 237-1-(4) | cc-78 15 16 PU of Times Right
SIO Reset 228-1,2,3-(12) * Bel,. -,27-(12,12,4)
Times Left
C069 15 16 1/3 | PU of Intermediate Invert HD-1-(12) heal,» -y27-(12,12,4)
1/211 etc
2h3—1,.0,21-(4,6 or 12) cc-79 6 51/3 | PU of F 18~1-(4)
cc-70 8 16 Hold of .785 relay CC~80 1/16 12 9 Controls impulse to Cycle ctr magnet}
236-1,2,3-(12,6,4) PU of Compare Control 8-1-(4)
MC-DR Reset Control #1
239-1~(4)
MC-DR Reset Control #2
238~1-(12)
CC-71 uy 15 1/3 | PU of w/2 279-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
1 278=1,2,3=(12,12,h)
2 w 280-1,2,3-(12,12,4
SIO Invert 242-1-(125
CC-72 01/2 2 Hold of SM=3 83=-1,2-(12,4)
CC~73 Ww 15 1/3 | PU of LM 42-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
SIO Out #3 272-1,2,3-(12,12,4)
CCH=7h, 13 1/2 16 Hold of Sign Control #2 71-1-(4)
(47-13-1. NC
CC=75 11 8 Hold of Sign Control #1 70-1-(4)
(52-36 NC)

ecs

STORAGE CAMS

PSS

Can Make Break Function Cam Make Break Function
SC-1 1 11/2 | 1 implse control SC=12 1 u PU of Carry SCA~7,8-(12)
24th Column Carry SCA-10,11-(4)
SC-2 2 21/2 | 2 impulse control Check Relay-(4)
SC=3 3 3.1/2 | 3 impulse control SC=13 2 11/2 | PU of Carry Control SCA-9-(4)
High Accuracy Carry Interlock
SC-4 4 4.1/2 | & impulse control CI-1,2—(6)
Ctr 71 Carry Back Control
SC-5 5 5.1/2 | 5 impulse control sc71-20-(6)
8C-6 6 61/2 6 impulse control SC=1y 2 14 1/16} Hold of Carry Control SCA~9=(4)
' High Accuracy Carry Interlock
SC~7 7 71/2 | 7 impulse control O1-1,2-(6)
Ctr 71 Carry Back Control
SC-8 8 81/2 | 8 impulse control $071-20-(6)
SC-9 9 91/2 9 impulse control SC=15 13 15 1/3 | PU of 2hth ery aad
SCA-10,11-(4
SC=10 12 12 1/2 | Control carry impulse Hold of Choice Relay-(6)
SC+11 12 (¢) Hold of SC~16 wy 15 1/3 | PU of Reset Relay-(12)
Str Ctr In SCA~1,2,3-(12,12,4) Invert Relay-(12) to be used
Str Ctr Out SCA-4,5,6~(12,12,4) with Choice Counter
Check Relay-(4)
Invert Relay-(12) SC=17 wu 14 1/2 | PU of Invert Relay-(12) for minus
Reset Relay-(12) absolute value RO
High Accuracy Ctrs Sperial In
Sp6l—-1-(4) etc. SC-18 wu 14, 1/2 | PU of Invert Relay-(12) for plus

Ctr 71 Normal Out Cont:rol
$071-14~(6)

Ctr 71 Normal In Control
SC71-16-(6)

Ctr 71 Special Out (direct)
8C71~15-(6)

Ctr 71 Special Out (shifted)
SC71-18=1,2-(12,6)

Ctr 71 Special In (direct)
8C71-17-(6)

Ctr 71 Special In (shifted)
SC71L-19-1,2-(12,6)

Switch Out SwA~1,2,3-(12,12,4)

Switch Invert Relay-(12)

PU of Ctr 71 Normal Out

SC71-1,2,3-(12,12,6)

Ctr 71 Normal In
SC71<4,,5,6-(12,12,6)

absolute value RO

MP-DIV RELAYS AND FUSES

Relay No. Fuse No. Relay No. Fuse No. Relay No. Fuse No.
l-row 1 23 25 35 64, 35
l-row 2 2h 26 35 65 35
l-row 3 25 27 35 66 38
l-row 4 26 28 35 67 38
l-row 5 27 29 35 68 38
l-row 6 28 30 35 69 40
l-row 7 29 31 35 70 39
l-row 8 30 32 35 71 38
lerow 9 31 33 38 72 38
2-row 1 wy 34-1,2,3 39 73 38
2-row 2 15 Bhd 40 Wh 38
2-row 3 16 35 40 75 38
2-row 4 17 36 41 76 38
2=-row 5 18 37 36 17 38
2=-row 6 19 38 37 78 38
2-row 7 20 39 37 79 38
2~row & 21 40 37 80 38
2-row 9 22 41 37 81 38
Bal, 00 52h 33 42 37 82 38
3-25 38 43-1, ..,10 42 83 38
4 32 43~11 36 8h 38
5 32 43-12 i 85 38
6 34 Ab A2 86 38
7 34 45 42 87 41
8 34 46 42 88 41
9 34 47 42 89 39
10 34 48 42 90 43
11 34 49 43 91 32
12-1 3h 50 43 92 32
12-2 35 51 43 93 32
13 34 52 43 oh 38
lu 34 53 43 95 43
15 34 5h 43 96 43
16 34 55 43 97 43
17 3h 56 AL 98 43
18 34 57 39 99 AT
19 34 58 39 994 47
20 34 59 39 Shift Cireuit 47
21 35 60 45 Low Order P-Out AT
22 35 61 45 Heavy Duty 46
23 35 62 45
2h 35 63 34

S&S
MP~DIV RELAYS AND FUSES

9SS

Fuse No. Relay No. Fuse No. Relay No.
1 Intermediate Counter Magnets 25 l- 3rd row
2 MC-DR Counter Magnets (1-2 26 l= 4th row
3 MC-DR Counter Magnets (3-6 27 1+ 5th row
4 MC-DR Counter Magnets (4-8) 28 le 6th row
5 MC-DR Counter Magnets (5) 29 l- 7th row
6 MC-DR Counter Magnets (7 30 l- 8th row
7 MC-DR Counter Magnets (9 31 1l~ 9th row
8 MP Counter Magnets 32 455591,92,93
9 DD Counter Magnets columns 1-24 33 (Bel, oe y2h)
10 DD Counter Magnets columns 25-45 34 6,7,8 910,11, (12-1) ,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,63
11 PQ Counter Magnets columns 1-24 35 (1225 21, 22,23,24,25,26,27 28,29, 30,31, 32,6 965
12 PQ Counter Magnete columns 25-46 and 47 36 37, (43-11
13 Q-Shift, Sequence, and Cycle Counter Magrets 37 38,39,40,41,42
ls Qe ist row 38 (32255, 33,66 67,68, 71, 72,73» 7hy75 516577 118,79 5805
15 2— 2nd row 81,82, 83, 84,85,86, 94
17 2- ith row 40 (3h=15 »35569
18 2— 5th row 42 36 43-12), 87,68
19 2= 6th row 42 (idm2, «4109 ylukyh5,46 547 48
21 2- 8th row Ab 56
22 2= 9th row 45 60,61,62
23 l1- lst row 46 Heavy Duty Relays .
2h 1+ 2nd row 47 99,99A,Shift Circuit,Low Order P-Out

557

INDEX

The references are to pages,

Abacus, 1, ©
Abbreviations, used in appendices, 405,
used in bibliography, 397,
Absolute value, 16.
check counter, 20, 131,
choice counter, 17,
coding, 110,
operation, 65,
Accuracy, 51,
in division, 26, 120, 249,
in high accuracy computation, 23, 151,
in subtabulation, 225,
of exponential unit, 32, 165,
of functional tapes, 196.
of logarithm unit, 30, 162.
_ of sine unit, 33, 182.
Addition, 3, 14, 60,
coding, 107, 109.
Aiken, H. H., 27, 52.
Algebraic sign, 3, 12, 78,
. choice counter, 17, 129,
in high accuracy computation, 142,
of arguments in functional tapes, 195,
Analytical engine, 5,
Argument control, 236,
coding, 238.
plugging, 276,
Asymptotic expansions, 369.
Automatic check counter, see Check counter,
Automatic codes, 15, 99.
circuits, 433,

Babbage, Charles, 1, 4, 7.
analytical engine, 5,
difference engine, 4, 6.
Bessel functions, 335, 3377.
Bibliography of numerical analysis, 338.
Build-up, 75,

Cam, 12, 53, 60.
list, 550,
Card feed, 42.
coding, 229.
operation, 96,
operating instructions, 290,
plugging, 272,
Card punch, 42, 44,
checking, 233,
coding, 231, 241,

operation, 93,
operating instructions, 290.
plugging, 274,
serial and code numbers, 134, 140, 229,
234, 251,
. timing, 106.
Cards, Hollerith, 5.
International Business Machines, 95.
Jacquard, 5.
serial and code numbers, 134, 140, 229,
234, 251..
Carry, 1, 2, 4.
circuit, 63,
contact, 61,
in ganged counters, 20, 143,
in MIO counter, 133,
in multiplicand-divisor counters, 69.
in SIO counter, 139,
in print counters, 95, 236.
in punch counter, 93, 231.
See also End around carry.
Cascade relays, 53, 93.
list, 411,
Central difference interpolation, 206,
Check counter, 20,
circuits, 455,
coding, 131, 241,
Checks, 131,
of functional tapes, 199,
of general computation, 287,
of printed data, 240,
of punched cards, 233,
operating instructions, 291,
Choice counter, 17,
circuits, 449,
coding, 108, 110, 129,
Code, 12, 98.
automatic, 15, 99,
non-automatic, 99, 101,
Code numbers, see Cards,
Coding, 12, 98.
Commutator, 59,
Compare cycle, 84,
Comparison, 25.
plugging, 249,
timing, 105,
See also Division and Place limitation,
Complements on nine and ten, 2,
in division, 25,
