                           DOCUMENT RESUME

ED 320 143                                             CS 212 238

AUTHOR           Schriver, Karen A.
TITLE            Document Design from 1980 to 1990: Challenges tnat
                 Remain. Technical Report No. 39.
INSTITUTION      Center for the Study of Writing, Berkeley, CA.;
                 Center for the Study of Writing, Pittsburgh, PA.
SPONS AGENCY     Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),
                 Washington, DC.
PUB DATE         Jan 90
NOTE             37p.; Also in the journal "Technical Communication,"
                 volume 36, number 4, p316-333.
PUB TYPE         Information Analyses (070) -- Viewpoints (120)

EDRS PRICE       MF01/PCO2 Plus Postage.
DESCRIPTORS      Design Requirements; Research Needs; *Rhetoric;
                 *Theory Practice Relationship; *Writing
                 (Composition)
IDENTIFIERS      Design Research; *Text Design; Text Factors

ABSTRACT
                Arguing that document design had its origins in the
1930s but that much of its development in theory, research, and
practice has occurred in the 1980s, this paper provides a snapshot of
the evolution of document design. The paper defines "document design"
as the theory, research, and practice of creating cor.prehensible and
persuasive texts. The paper includes a comprehensive list of 195
research references and stresses the need to integrate theory and
research with practice in the 1990s. The paper concludes by
identifying critical challenges to the international growth of
document design, both in the academy and industry--challenges that
must be met if document design is to flourish. Three figures are
included. (RS)




     Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that pan be made
                      from the original document.
************** **************** * ****** **********************************
     CO
     gt14
     r4

i
      =
      Cq
       CO

            Center
*I


       =
             for               Technical Report No. 39

                              DOCUMENT DESIGN
             the            FROM 1980 TO 1990:
                          CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN

            Study               Karen A. Schriver


              of                    January, 1990




            Writing
                                           U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                      Office of Educational Research and Improvement
                                      EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION
                                                 CENTER (ERIC)
                                      C' This document has been reprOduced as
                                         received from the person or organization
                                         originating it
                                      O Minor changes have been made to improve
                                        reproduction qualtty

                                         Points of new or opinions slated in this docu
                                        ment do no' necessarily represent official
                                        OERI posit*, or policy




                  University of California, Berkeley
                  Carnegie Mellon University

                                2
                       BEST COPY AVAILABLE
                  CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF WRITING




                                                       Technical Report No. 39

                                                   DOCUMENT DESIGN
                                              FROM 1980 TO 1990:
                                            CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN

                                                        Karen A. Schriver


                                                           January, 1990




Also appears in Technical Communication, 36 (4), 316-333.



University of California                                     Carnegie Mellon University
Berkeley, CA 94720                                               Pittsbu%h, PA 15213



 The project presented, or reported herein, was performed pursuant to a grant from the Office of
Educational Research and Improvement/Department of Education (OERI/ED) for the Center for the
Study of Writing. However, the opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the position or
policy of the OERI/ED and no official endorsement by the OERIED should be inferred.




                                                   3
  CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF WRITING

  Director                   Sarah Warshauer Freedman, University of California, Berkeley

  Co-Directors              Linda Flower, Carnegie Mellon University
                            James Gray, University of California, Berkeley
                            J.R. Hayes, Carnegie Mellon University

 Academic Coordinator       Sandra Schecter, University of California, Berkeley

 Acting Editor              Andrew Bouman, University of California, Berkeley


 Publication Review Board

 Chair                      Kay Losey Fraser, University of California, Berkeley

 Assistant Chairs           Anne Di Pardo, University of Galifomia, Berkeley
                            Lorraine Higgins, Carnegie Mellon University

 Advisors                   Charles Fillmore, University of California, Berkeley
                            Jill H. Larkin, Carnegie Mellon University


 Millie Almy, Gliversity of California, Berkeley
 Carla Asher, Herbert H. Lehman College of the City University of New York
 Nancie Atwell, Boothbay Region Elementary School, Boothbay Harbor, ME
 Robert de Beaugrande, University of Florida
 Ruby Bernstein, Northgate High School, Walnut Creek CA
 Lois Bird, Whole Language Consultant
 Wayne Booth, University of Chicago
 Robert Caifee, Stanford University
 Michael Cole, University of California, San Diego
Colette Daiute, Harvard University
John Daly, University of Texas, Austin
Peter Elbow, State University of New York, Stony Brook
JoAnne T. Eresh, Writing and Speaking Center, Pittsburgh, PA
Donald Graves, University of New Hampshire
Robert Gundlach, Northwestern University
James Hahn, Fairfield High School, Fairfield , CA
Sarah Hudelson, Arizona State University
Julie Jensen, University of Texas, Austin
Jo Keroes, San Francisco State University
Aidrea Lunsford, Ohio State University
Marian M. Mohr, Fairfax County Public Schools, Fairfax County, VA
Lee Odell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Charles Read, University of Wisconsin
Victor Rental, Ohio State University
Michael W. Stubbs, University of London
Dtoborah Tannen, Georgetown University
Gordon Wells, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education




                                                                          4
                             Document Design from 1980 to 1990:
                                  Challenges that Remain
                                                By

                                        Karen A. Schri.r.4
                                         Carnegie Meth . n


Abstract

Document design had its origins in the 1930s, but much of its development in theory, research, and
practice has occurred in the past ten years (1980-1990). This article provides a snapshot of the
evolution of document design, includes a comprehensive list of research references, and stresses the
need to integrate theory and research with practice as we move into the 1990s. The article
concludes by identifying critical challenges to the international growth of document design, both in
the academy and industry--challenges that must be met if document design is to flourish.




                                                  5
                       DOCUMENT DESIGN FROM 1980 TO 1990:
                           CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN
                                                    by

                                            Karen A. Schriver
                                            Carnegie Mellon

        "Document design" is the theory, research and practice of creating comprehensible, usable
 and persuasive texts. Here, I mean "text" in its broadest sense, including both oral and written,
 and both visual or verbal. Professional document designers are rhetoricians whose education
 allows them to find creative solutions for the wide variety of ill-defined communication problems
 confronting business, industry, government, and education. Document design as a practice is not
 tied to particular text genres, particular audiences, particular subject matters, or particular text
 purposes. It is a highly constructive activity in which building an adequate repicsentation of a
 communication problem demands careful analysis of the unique fearzes of the given rhetorical
 situation. Thus, while knowing about particular text genres, audiences, subject matters, and
 purposes can be helpful, such knowledge is often a limited and even inhibiting starting point. In
 fact, if document designers invoke such knowledge too rigidly when they are building a
 representation of a communication problem, it can stifle their ability to find an original and creative
 solution.

       In this article, I take a brief look at the activity of document design over the last decade. In
particular, I am concerned with relating theory and research to practice in document design. To do
so, I first discuss changes that we have seen in the theory of and research into document design,
suggesting Ware we are heading as we move into the 1990s. Then I raise some issues about the
practice of document design and focus on some of the skills and sensibilities document designers
need to cultivate. Finally, I raise some concerns about the future of document design theory and
research, isolating some of the persistent challenges that are constraining progress in this area.


THEORY AND RESEARCH THAT INFORM DOCUMENT DESIGN
       Document design is an interdisciplinary area of inquiry with rich historical roots. It draws
on a matrix of theory and research about how people produce and use text, particularly how they
read, write, understand, and are motivated by text. At its heart, document design is concerned
with readers and writers and how writers can most effectively find ways to provide readers with
texts they can use, understand and perhaps even get excited about. Document design emphasizes
both verbal features (rhetorical, linguistic, and discourse) and visual (graphic and typographic)
dimensions of text. Thus, much of document design theory and research relates to cognitive,
social, historical, and cultural issues which underlie the activity of creating and integrating visual
and verbal text to meet the reader's various and frequently changing needs.

      The knowledge that document designers need to draw on has been expanding rapidly in the
past ten years. Figure 1 shows my characterization of the relevant theory and research influencing
document design ten years ago as described by Felker and his associates at the American Institutes
for Research, Siegel & Gale, Inc., and Carnegie Mellon University [1]. As shown, early
conceptions of document design highlighted the importance of composition, cognitive psychology,
instructional design, readability, human factors, typography and graphic design, and
psycholinguistics.

      Figure 2 presents my understanding of where we are now and the fields which are essential
to current theory, research and practice. We can see that the boundaries of document design are
expanding and this evolution is forcing us to think about our work in more complicated
                                                                                       ways than



                                                     6
   ever before. We have enlarged our vision of the field by also drawing
   psychology, reading comprehension, human-computer interaction,        on rhetoric, social
   discourse analysis, and cultural studies.                          computer  technologies,




  Figure 1. Relevant theory and research influencing document design ten
  from Felker, 1980; see reference 1).                                         years ago (derived


       In 1980, for example, the field of rhetoric was just beginning
 English in the U.S. The wedding of rhetoric and composition           to reemerge in departments of
                                                                  is providing us with a very
 powerful historical and theoretical framework for considering
                                                                 how people construct meaning. It
 has also been a catalyst for building empirical theories about how
 contexts read and write [2]. Adding rhetoric to document design people in particular rhetorical
 audience and of diverse knowledge communities. Moreover, it hasheightened our awareness of
 simplistic notion that we always write for "generic" lay readers.     helped us to move beyond the




Figure 2. Relevant theory and research influencing
                                                      document design today.

      Cognitive psychology, with its emphasis on how individuals think and learn,
us with a detailed portrait of some of the key decisions people make                   has provided
Another promising direction for document design lies in                as they read and  write.
                                                          exploring the literature in social
psychology and relating those findings to our concerns. With the addition
we can characterize readers' and writers' decisions more fully                of social psychology,
                                                                as taking place within groups artd

                                                            7
                                             2
 organizations. Social psychology offers a large body of information about how people form
 impressions of others and about how they negotiate communication situations. Document
 designers are beginning to use such information in creating and evaluating oral and written
 discourse.

       As Felker and his colleagues point out, early characterizations of document design focused
on the readability of text as measured by readability formula: [1, 71]. That interest, while useful,
gave us only a small window into the ways that texts can mislead and confuse readers. It also
tended to make us concentrate on the word and sentence level of text to the exclusion of larger
discourse structures. Early work in readability was severOv limited by a model of reading that
emphasized text features rather than readers [3]. Current theories of reading and psycholinguistics
are strengthened by taking a much broader view of what goes on when people read; we now look
carefully at the complex interactions between readers and texts. Thus, from now on investigations
into iss ies of clarity and comprehensibility in document design must take into consideration recent
work in both reading comprehension and discourse analysis. In addition, ongoing document
design research must give emphasis to visual dimensions of text, relating how visual and verbal
text structures work together in helping or hindering readers' abilities to build an integrated
understanding of text.

       Certainly the growth of computing technologies has been a major influence in altering our
 thinking about document design over the past ten years, particularly our understanding of human
factors and instructional design issues. The explosion of the computer industry has not only made
 us aware of innovative ways to deliver, store, and transfer information, but it has opened up new
 ways to think about the structure of information itself. Emerging technologies have simultaneously
created challenges for research in human-computer interaction and user interface design,
 spotlighting the importance of developing sophisticated theories of user-centered design. If one
were to conduct a literature search on the influence of the computer on communications design
since 1980, it would be an enormous undertaking. For example, a few years ago a group of
researchers at Carnegie Mellon's Communications Design Center put together a review of the
literature relating to the design of hardcopy and online documentation [4]. We excluded anything
that did not have an empirical base. At that time (late 1985), we found over two hundred relevant
articles, and by the time we went to print (Spring 1986), found hundreds more that had to be
included in a supplemental bibliography. In looking at that reyiew today, we think, "how dated!"
Interdisciplinary research in this area will continue to influence our thinking about document design
in the 1990s.

      One of the most interesting additions to the field over the last few years is cultural studies,
although so far, we have very little work that makes explicit connections between it and document
design. It is clear, however, that cultural studies can contribute to document design in important
ways. Understanding the historical, ideological, and cultural forces in organizations, societies,
and cultures can help us better anticipate the assumptions, motivations, and reasons that people
read and write as they do. As Odell has pointed out:

             . . .we have reason to suspect that a writer may be influenced not only by

             interaction with colleagues, but by something much less readily
             observableby what Terrence E. Deal and Allen A. Kennedy [5] call the
             "culture" of the organization in which a writer works. That is, writers
             who are members of an organization (a corporation, a bureaucracy, a
             school, a club) may have internalized values, attitudes, knowledge, and
             ways of acting that are shared by other members of the organization. This
             culture, Deal and Kennedy assert, influences "practically everything" in
             the life of the organization [6, 250].

       The last decade has prepared the way for advances in document design and it looks as though
this theoretically exciting area of humanistic inquiry is gaining attention and momentum. Taken
together, these new areasrhetoric, social psychology, reading comprehension, hinnan and
computer interaction, computer technologies, discourse analysis, and cultural stu.liesalong with

                                              3
                                                       8
 those we already embraced-composition, cognitive psychology, instructional design, human
 factors, typography, graphic design, and psycholinguistics-are forming a more contemporary
 conception of document design.


 KEY CLUSTERS OF RESEARCH IN DOCUMENT DESIGN

        Although document design is a vigorous field of study, it has an impoverished and scattered
  literature [4]. In fact, to date, there are very few reviews of theory and research in document
 design. This is so because document design is yet an emerging discipline which draws on the
 research of many fields of inquiry. It has been difficult to define the parameters of the field and
 even more difficult for reviewers to decide what issues to focus on. Furthermore, much of the
 research in the area has been conducted in Britain and is not widely available in the U.S. In
 addition, there are almost no journals devoted to document design and those that published much
 of the early work in the area have been undergoing difficult times to "stay afloat." (I am thinking
 of Visible Language and Information Design Journal). Thus, to review the research in document
 design in a way that captures its interdisciplinary nature as well as its historical evolution within an
 international research community is no minor task

      There are now a number of works which, taken together, have helped to define the
 parameters of document design [1, 4, 7-32]. The cumulative efforts of people who have
 conducted basic research, applied what was found from research, or cautioned against moving too
 quickly from research to application have helped to conceputalize document design.

       Document designers build knowledge in Iwo primary ways: we either conduct our own
sridies or examine the implications of existing research in related areas. Most of the work up to
'ills point has clustered in five areas: research on (1) writers, (2) readers, (3) text design,
(4) text evaluation, and (5) communication technologies. Researchers, of course, aim to
draw inferences that help us to better understand how these areas interact. I will separate them
simply for the purpose of discussion.

      It is important to mention that much of the work that document designers use is not
conducted under the name of document design. As I pointed out above, document design is an
eclectic field and we borrow heavily from other fields to help us contextualize and refine our
understanding of the issues that concern us. For this reason, in the characterizations that follow, I
do not distinguish those researchers who view themselves as document designers from those who
do not.


Cluster One: Research rqcused on Writer-
      In exploring the writer as a creator of text, researchers in the past ten years have been
focusing on both writers' processes and writers' contexts. On the one hand, researchers are
studying the process of writing itself; while on the other, they are looking at how context
influences what writers do.

      Researchers who study the process of writing tend to examine writers' key decision points as
they plan ideas, generate text, revise text, and evaluate its success [8, 14, 16, 26-27, 33 -51].
This work which began by exploring cognitive processes involved in reading and writing has been
elaborated with inquiry into social processes [6, 42, 52-53]. Much of the current research into
writing processes concentrates on the types of knowledge that are important for developing
expertise in writing: subject matter knowledge [43, 51, 54-56], social knowledge [57-58],
linguistic and discourse knowledge [38, 46-47, 51, 54, 59-61], strategic knowledge [8,
40-41, 49, 62], rhetorical knowledge [8, 33, 49-51, 63-64], and perceptual knowledge [8,
34, 37, 40, 43-44, 49, 65]. (These are, of course, only some of the areas under
investigation.)
                                                            9
                                               4
       Researchers are finding that early models of the writing process such as the 1980 Hayes and
Flower model of composing [36] need refinement and are working on those modifications and
elaborations [66]. During the 1970s, our attention was focused primarily on written products
generally viewed out of context. In the 1980s, our attention turned to studying writing processes
also generally viewed out of context. In the 1990s, our attention has expanded to include writing
processes and products and we insist on viewing both in context. We are looking for ways to help
writers transfer their knowledge of "writing processes" (e.g., recognizing that setting goals during
planning is central to generating and evaluating ideas) to "creating effective texts" (e.g., actually
generating text that is informed by one's goals during planning). To put it differently, we are
striving to lessen separations between thinking and doing. We want to make theoretical and
practical connections between process and product in the varied environments in which writing
takes place.

       Parallel discussions are occurring in our sister fields. Currently, in the educational research
literature, for example, we find debate over the study of cognition in context. Researchers and
educators are arguing over ways of studying and teaching ill-defined problem solving activijes
(such as writing) as they are situated in the social and physical world [67-68]. They are
concerned with building bridges between knowing and doing, between thinking and acting. Work
discussing a theory of "situated cognition" is raising new questions (as well as reminding us of
some old questions) about relationships among domains such as reading, writing, and mathematics
[69-70]. Document designers are taking advantage of this recent work and are becoming
increasingly self conscious and reflective about what they do in carrying out a complex writing
task.

      Researchers investigating the writing context explore the organizational, political, social,
cultural, physical, and technological contexts in which writers work and the ways in which context
influences how document design tasks are represented and carried out. Most work dur far
concerns writers as they compose while working within organizations [6, 22-23, 52,' 1-74] or
while participating as members of collaborative document design teams [75]. It also describes
reading and composing while using computers [76-77] and evaluates how people interact with
technology [78-79].

      The goals of research focused on writers' processes and contexts include (1) building
theories of writing, (2) modeling basic processes, and (3) developing methods for improving
writers' abilities to create effective text (whether they are composing alone, within organizations,
or as part of a team, using pen and paper or computers).


Cluster Two: Research Focused on Readers
       Research into readers' needs investigates the goals, expectations, information requirements,
preferences, performance abilities and learning strategies of readers with varying educational and
experiential backgrounds, linguistic abilities, prior knowledge, and reading skills [80-95). Work
in this area is helping writers build a more accurate representation of particular readers as they are
engaged in understanding and using text.

      In the past ten years, we have seen a number of reviews of work in audience written by
people in rhetoric and composition; see, for example, Ede and Lunsford's review [96]. We have
also observed a proliferation of empirical work on readers' needs coming from reading
comprehension theorists, educational psychologists, instructional designers, and psycholinguists.
This work is providing us with essential information About the processes involved in reading as
well as about the strategies people employ during comprehension. One of the more interesting
findings is that readers' ability to construct meaning from text is partly related to their ability to
think about their own understanding as they read. More specifically, research has underscored the
centrality of metacognitive knowledge in readingthat is, knowledge of strategies for planning
ahead, for checking one's understanding, and for revising one's strategies for comprehending
during reading.

                                              510
       Many studies have :shown that children, young adults, and less able readers are not aware
 that they need to "be strategic, plan ahead, and check their own understanding" [85, 502]. For
 such reasons, writers need to find ways to design text that anticipates a quick, probably passive
 reading. Document designers are well aware that such reading strategies are typical, especially
 with instructional, functional, and science texts. As document designers, we often write for
 readers who are in a hurry, frustrated, bored, and who would prefer to get information needed
 from text in any other way but reading.

        A related strand of research focuses on exploring the needs of computer users. Part of this
 work aims to define and classify user groups [97-102]. Along with work that aims to
 distinguish different kinds of users is research that is observing what users have in common.
 Efforts in this area have focused on how users learn to use technology, the problems they have
 with navigating through online search spaces (such as hypertext), and the mental models they bling
 to interacting with machines [103-106]. The goals are to move from empirical findings about
 users' needs to specifying ways to design text (either online or hardcopy) that meets those needs
 and to build effective user interfaces and computing systems.

       In Research in Written Composition, Hillocks points out that it is surprising we have not
 seen more empirical work in this area coming from rhetoric and cot position researchers, given the
 high profile of "audience analysis" in the literature [107, 84]. Research into readers' needs seems
 likely to flourish in the 1990s, especially research on cultural differences, because of the creation
 of the open market in the European community in 1992. And with international trade increasing,
 we can expect to see more research into cross cultural negotiations [108].

       The importance of this cluster of research cannot be overemphasized. Recent discussions of
 audience argue convincingly that much of the folk wisdom about readers is too general to be
 useful. We are also learning that guidelines about audience are often difficult to translate into
 action [50, 109]. Writers and speakers need more detailed knowledge about what readers or
 listeners are "actually doing with their texts." In this way, they can move from "audience analysis"
 to making explicit text plans and revisions.


 Cluster Three: Research Focused on Text Design
       Research on text design concerns the effects of various text designs, both visual and verbal,
on readers' comprehension, performance and textual preferences. This work has been directed to
the question, "How can we design text that both appeals to an intended readership and enhances
their ability to understand, learn, use and retrieve information?" Researchers have been trying to
determine why some texts appear to promote seemingly effortless comprehension while others
make readers struggle to understand.

      Through evaluating how texts operate, researchers in this area are providing us with
information about cognitive aspects of readability [110-113]. We are also gaining insights into
readers' responses to (a) topic sentences [114]; (b) topical structure [38]; (c) paragraph structures
[115]; (d) coherence in text [116-118]; (e) performance-oriented headings [119-120], (0
structural signals [89, 121]; (g) examples and elaborations [122-123]; (h) metaphors and
analogies [124-131]; (i) typography [24,132 -134]; (j) graphics, illustrations, and pictures
[10, 15, 17-18, 21, 28, 29,135 -137]; and (k) charts, diagrams, and tables [29,138 -140].
By looking at readers' responses to such visual and verbal text features, researchers draw
inferences about the text structures that promote or inhibit readers' comprehension and use of text.

       Recent studies are beginning to uncover the amount of content and the level of detail to
provide for optimal understanding of text, particularly instil- 'onal texts such as tutorials for
computer users [141-144]. Such work is also giving us a better sense of the various text
structures that enhance readers' abilities to draw "accurate" inferences from instructional text
[145]. These and other studies are helping us to make more informed decisions about integrating
visual and verbal text.

                                             6
                                                             11
 Cluster Four: Research Focused on Text Evaluation
       Research in text evaluation develops, refines, and tests alternative methodologies for
 assessing the effectiveness of text. Text-evaluation studies have a long history. In the 1930s,
 work mainly focused on generating formulas to assess the relative readability of text [3]. Today,
 most work in the area is directed to research into persuasiveness, comprehensibility, memorability,
 and usability. Recent studies draw heavily on the literature in rhetoric, reading comprehension,
 psycholinguistics, discourse analysis, text design, human factors, and instructional design.

      Such work raises the questions: In what ways do particular methods for evaluating text
quality help us to discriminate good from bad text? What are the advantages and disadvantages of
particular evaluation methods? What methods give evaluators insight into problems at the global
level of the text, e.g., problems caused by the text's organization? What kinds of feedback helps
writers most when involved in revising to meet readers' needs? What are the best converging
methods for evaluating text? What do writers learn from testing? How can we build computer
programs that will help reduce the burden of text evaluation [4, 27, SO, 110, 146-161]?

      Text-evaluation research is playing an enormous role in education, the military, and industry.
Work in education, for example, is investigating methods for assessing the effectiveness of the
textbooks used by millions of schoolchildren and adults [82]. Similarly, the e Jsion of
usability testing in industry is fostering the development of ways to incorporate text evaluation into
all phases of the document-development cycle, and sophisticated formative and summative
evaluation procedures are now becoming commonplace. Writers are finding that reader-focused
testing methods [156] help them beyond revising the text under evaluation; they also give writers
information that is useful in planning future texts. In particular, we are learning that
reader - focused testing methods such as protocol-aided revision have immediate and long-term
benefits for helping writers to anticipate readers' problems with poorly written text [50,
156-157].

      Another strand of text-evaluation research focuses on characterizing the cognitive processes
of writers as they are engaged in the activity of evaluating a text from the perspective of the
intended reader. Researchers want to know what evaluators look for when judging text quality.
This work is telling us that experienced text evaluators pay close attention to text problems caused
by what is written and by what is left out. Put differently, evaluators need to be sensitive to
problems of commission such as faulty syntax and problems of omission such as missing
examples and elaborations [50j. Problems of omission are, of course, the most difficult to
anticipate.

      Investigations into text evaluation are changing the way we define text quality and are
broadening our understanding of the nature of revLion. Bccause text-evaluation research is
centrally concerned with discovering ways to decide whether what we write works, it is perhaps
the most critical research area.


Cluster Five: Research Focused on Communication Technologies
      Research focused on communication technologies examines both the impact of the
information medium and the effect of information structures on readers. This work has a wide
rartge of general directions (for instanceonline information, online help, natural-language
interfaces, hypertext, video disk, CD-ROM and so on) as well as a myriad of subspecialties (such
as message, menu, and icon design). Major research thrusts include (1) how people use media,
(2) how particular features of media influence human-machine interaction, and (3) how peoples'
expectations and prior knowledge influence their reception of media. Most work in the area has
specialized in creating online text and novel approaches to organizing and delivering information
[162-166]. Recently, considerable energy is being devoted to designing approaches to
non-linear text structures [167-172].



                                             712
        Researclvas interested in communication technologies are often intrigued by the intersection
 of issues and duly, for example, begin by studying general questions about how people use online
 help. The results of such an inquiry might lead them to ask a more focused question, such as how
 pull down menus influence users' abilities to tczess help. And the results of that son of study
 might suggest ways to study how menu-driver interfaces influences users' expectations in using
 hypertext systems; see Duffy, Palmer, and Mehlenbacher's work, for example [163].

       Work in this area has been accelerating. Document designers can take advantage of the
 efforts of an enormous number oflesearchers in human-computer interaction, interface design, and
 computer scier.ce. It is important that document designers who want to work in this area,
 however, draw on and consider the literature in the other four research clusters discussed above
 before they undertake new missions. Research into communication technologies must be
 grounded in research on people. Humanists have an important role to play in the progress of this
 area in the 1990s.


SOME MISUNDERSTANDINGS REI `TED TO DOCUMENT DESIGN PRACTICE
     Document design is not, as some have trivialized it, the process of formatting text to make it
visually appealirT, nor is it desktop publishing. Although page design is an important skill if one
is working with text on paper or on a screen, a good page designer or desktop publisher is not a
document designer. These misunderstandings have an obvious origin: the name "document
design" itself.

      The word "document" in "document design" is the first problem; it connotes a restricted
meaning (that is, paper documents) that does not adequately represent the nature of the field nor the
scope of its activities. For such reasons, most document design firms and research organizations
now characterize what they do as "information design" or as "communications design." Thus, the
rationale behind the name of Carnegie Mellon's document design research organization, The
Communications Design Center.

       A second problem is with the word "design" in document design. Ask most people what
they think of when they hear the word "design" and the: will mention graphic desig-, industrial
design, fashion design and so on. Typically, however, most people are not familiar with hearing
"document" and "design" used together, and are often less stereotypical in their "off the cuff"
definition of it than they are in their definition of the phrase "technical communication."
                                                                                            Thus, the
relative ambiguity in the name document design can, I think, be seen to have a positive side. In his
introduction, Felker rationalizes the choice of "document design":

             Everyday, millions of people read public documents prepared by
             government agencies, commercial and financial organizations. These
             public documents include regulations for every conceivable kind of
             product and process, labels for over-the-counter and prescription drugs.
             rental agreements and insura.-ktx policies, and income tax instructions and
             forms. . .We use the term "document design" to dercribe the overall
             movement at [sic] producing effe .ave public documentsdocuments that
             are comprehensible to their intended users. ..The words "document
            design" are a deliberate choice because they convey the complexity of the
             field. The terms "clear writing" and "plain English" are not sufficient
            because useful, understandable documents entail more than easy words
            and simple sentences. The organization and format of a document may be
            just as important as its language. The degree to which the document is
            matched to the capabilities of its users and the setting of its use may affect
            comprehension as much as clearly written sentences. The broader term
            "document design" encompasses these added complexities [1, 1-2].



                                             8              13
DOCUMENT DESIGN PRACTICE: KEY SKILLS AND SENSIBILITIES
       Felker's discussion raises a host of questions that practitioners in the area face every day: What
is a clear document? How do we know when a document is comprehens'ble for a particular
audience? What can a document designer do to make a document more understandable? An
important part of answering these questions lies in practitioners' abilities D recognize the kind of
reading that "gets done" in the academy and in the workplace as well as to anticipate "what readers are
doing" with text. Frase, Macdonald, ani Keenan describe the evolution of reading in the world of
work:
               As society has become more complex, so has reading. . .Reading at work
               is especially affected. In the 1970s a professional had to read 30
               documents a day to keep up with the field [173]. Today that figure has
               more than doubled, and technological change has compounded the
               problem. The Naval Air Systems Command, for instance, supplies
               technical manuals for 135 aircraft. There are over 25,000 manuals,
               totaling 3 million pages. In 1950 the manuals for one aircraft contained
               fewer than 2C10 pages; today the manuals for one aircraft contain nearly
               300,000 pages [174]. . .Not only has the information changed, but its
               Pm as well. Computers have altered the form of information from the
               familiar page to small packets of information displayed on a screen.
              These Nits and pieces of information, propelled by satellite, stream around
               the globe, ignoring geographic and national boundaries. Indeed, literacy
               has entered a new age [150, 97-98].

     In addition to changes in the amount of reading that gets done, practitioners in document design
must anticipate a wide range of goals for engaging with text, including reading to

               Learn (studying a textbook)

               Enjoy (solving a mystery story in an online interactive fiction
               program)

               Dc a task (filling out a tax form)

               Write (synthesizing arguments in order to construct an original
               statement on a topic)

               Understand (reading to comprel t nd one's rights in a legal contract
               with a landlord)

               Be persuaded (reading an advertisement about exercising equipment)

              Find information quickly (reading a telephone directory to locate an
              emergency phone number for the police)

              Compare and contrast (reading the editorials in a newspaper)

              Learn to do (reading a tutorial to learn about a procedure that needs
              to be performed without the text)

              Make a decision (reading a pamphlet that describes the implications
              of voting for or against nuclear power)

              Assess the relevance or interestingness of a text (skimming the
              abstract of a journal article to decide if the content may be useful or
              interesting)



                                              9 14
                 Interpret and use the information for a purpose other than the text's
                 intended purpose (reading a computer manual to solve a problem that
                 is not described in the text, but that may be solved by looking at examples
                 of related problems)

       The diversity of readers' needs and goals across contexts means that we cannot define "a
 well-designed text" without reference to those needs, goals, and contexts. A good text for a novice
 is not necessarily a good text for an expert. Novice computer users, for example, have been found
 to prefer "asking another person for computing information" or using "hardcopy tutorials" while
 experts prefer "figuring it out for themselves" or "online documentation" [102]. The situation is
 complicated by the fact that an individual may be expert in one part of a domain and novice in
 another. Document designers in industry, government, and education are finding that it is becoming
 increasingly important to distinguish the writing they do for novices, intermediates, and experts.

        Unfortunately, up to this point, we have very little research on what audiences with different
 levels of subject matter knowledge (or domain expertise) need or want. We also have scant research
 on the knowledge writers need to be effective in selecting the most appropriate content, at the most
 appropriate level of detail, in the most appropriate form and media for a particular audience. We
 have almost no empirical work from the perspective of a document designer on the questions, What
 is the relationship between writing knowledge and subject matter knowledge? How does subject
 matter knowledge help writers? How does it hurt writers? Is it better to have an expert writer who is
 a subject matter novice or a novice writer who is a subject matter expert?

        Obviously some combination of writing knowledge and subject matter knowledge is important
 (and most of us who teach document design tend to emphasize "writing knowledge") but we have no
 empirical support for our instructional practices. (My colleagues and I are undertaking some work in
 this area [56] but have been unable to locate studies that look at the relationship between writing
 knowledge and subject matter knowledge in context, much less across diverse contexts such as those
 found in industry, government, and education.) Because writers need to think about readers in more
 precise ways, we must develop and test new instructional methods to help writers recognize readers'
 needs [50].

      We now know that when writers choose a career in document design, they must be prepared to
write just about any text genre for any sort of audience. Document designers working in the
consumer electronics industry, for example, must feel equally comfortable with writing the
operations guides for installing a state-of-the-art home theater system (that is, a fully integrated
audio/video system with a wide screen television and Dolby surround sound, CD player, audio/video
stereo receiver, dual tape deck, VCRs, giant loudspeakers, and so on) as they are in creating the
advertising copy for television and radio ads that feature users getting "blown away" by sound and
image. The same document designers may also have to feel equally comfortable ghost writing the
speech for the company's chief executive officer who has to deliver "the bottomline facts" to the
shareholders or writing the script for the company's sales representatives who are "hyping" the
-,
system at the international consumer electronics show.

      These diverse document design tasks call on a repertory of rhetorical talents. For instance, in
writing an operations guide or a fact-oriented speech, the writer must restrict meaning; in writing an
ad or creating a sales pitch, the writer aims to evoke interest. The ability to move easily between
creating a text that demands precise use of restricted meanings and one which offers readers the
invitation to embellish, to reconstruct, to free associate, to "make the text anew" is now a requisite
document design skill.

     Thus, the old industry stereotype that "anybody who can speak can write" is proving to be
grossly inadequate. When "anybody" is asked to write such diverse texts, they almost always fail.
Government and industry are tired of "losing face" or profits because of poor communication [175].
Headlines such as "Hundreds of Coleco's Adams are Returned oc Defective: Firm Blames User
Manuals" still haunt us [176].


                                              10            15
      As we head into the 1990s, companies around the world have or are planning to create
departments dedicated to document design. Further, many colleges and universities are developing
degree programs in document design. The growth of theory and research in the area is making
government and industry think seriously about providing in-house training programs in document
design as well as supporting continuing education at the university level. Many writers and
managers of publications departments are now expected to obtain a masters or doctoral degree in
rhetoric, document design, professional or technical communication. Indeed, document design is
rapidly becoming an area of subject matter expertise equal in sophistication to any other profession.


CHALLENGES THAT REMAIN
      There arc two persistent problems that have constrained research in the area. The first has been
the status of document design within the academy. And the second has been the lack of availability
of funding for researchers interested in either basic or applied work in the document design.

The First Problem: The Status of Document Design within the Academy
      Traditionally, investigations into nonacademic discourse (under the rubrics of professional
writing, technical communication, or document design) have not been popular nor have they been
rewarded in English departments in the U.S. Viewed as the ugly stepsister of acadmic discourse,
nonacademic writing has always had the lowest political status in an English departmenteven
lower than that of freshman composition (the traditional intellectual ghetto)and many people who
teach nonacademic writing and direct its programs are untenured instructors or part-time adjunct
faculty. Tenure-track faculty members in many U.S. English departments have been actively
discouraged &out publishing in the area because it has been construed as atheoretical,
anti-humanistic, smacking too much of the material world, and uninteresting in comparison to the
teaching of poetry, fiction, or academic discourse.

      Because document design embraces nonacademic discourse, the academy has tended to
construe document design's object of study as only nonacademic discourse. This has been
the view, even though document design has never excluded academic discourse. This
misunderstanding combined with pejorative attitudes about "tech writing" led many academics to
dismiss the area as lacking intellectual integrity. Richard E. Young summarizes the "tech writing"
stereotype in this way:

             Over the years "tech writing" has been for the most part characterized by a
             sharp split between form and meaning, along with equally sharp
             distinctions between convention and originality, objective and subjective
             knowledge, personal and impersonal style. The technical writer is to
             be concerned only with issues of linguistic form and convention, accuracy
             of statement, about objective reality, and an impersonal style. . .The
             teaching and practice of technical writing has been by and large an
             ahistorical, atheoretical enterprise with only the weakest of ties to
             rhetorical :tudies [177, 111.

      Luckily, this view is changing. In the last decade, many English departments in the U.S. have
been radically redefining what is important in studying reading and writing. Three major changes in
English departments are playing a major role in how document design is viewed: the rising status of
rhetoric and coati, ,Asidon, the reconceptualizing of document design as part of the study of rhetoric,
and the evolving definition of the study of literature.

      The rising status of rhetoric and composition. Ten years ago, almost no English department in
the U.S. would think of hiring a tenure-line faculty member with a primary interest in research in
rhetoric and composition. The few rhetoricians who were hired before 1980people such as
Edward P. J. Corbett, Wayne Booth, W. Ross Winterowd, Richard Ohmann, Janice Lauer, Richard
L. Larson, James Kinneavy, S. Michael Halloran, and Richard E. Youngtended to be among the

                                              11 16
 most visible scholars in rhetorical theory and history. (For a list of the most active rhetoricians in the
 U.S. during the mid 1970s, see the Newsletter of the Rhetoric Society of America [178].) The idea
 of hiring someone who wanted to study the process of composing in academic or nonacademic
 contexts was unheard of. Indeed, composition teachers were grossly exploited; when research in
 writing got done, it was not because English departments supported it, but despite their lack of
 support.

        Most of the intellectual debates of the time were not over research questions but rather over
 whether rhetorical studies even belonged in an English depai-tment. Many of the articles were
 rationales for or against the independence of rhetoric programs from traditional English departments.
 See, for example, Richard Coe's 1974 "Rationale for the Independence of Rhetoric Programs"
 [179] and Richard L. Johannesen's subsequent response [180]. Johannescn points out that the
 discipline of rhetoric was already firmly established in departments of speech and communication ten
 to twenty years before it became an "issue" in English. Nonetheless, during the 1970s there was
 considerable disagreement over the role of rhetoric in English (and, in fact, debates still persist and
 are certain to continue beyond the next decade as well). Although there have been enormous political
 difficulties (as well as personal costs to individual rhetoricians) in creating rhetoric programs within
 English, we have seen a dramatic rise in the status of rhetoric and composition over the last decade.

      Today, the more progressive departments have not only tenured literature faculty but tenured
rhetoric, composition, document design and technical communications faculty as well. The rise in
status of rhetoric and composition is reflected in structural changes in the undergraduate and graduate
curricula English departments offer. As Donald C. Stewart points out in his 1989 article, "What is
an English Major, and What Should It Be?":

              . . .the most remarkable undergraduate English program[s]. . . .offer
              students the opportunity to concentrate on literary and cultural studies,
              creative writing, professirnal writing, or technical writing. . . .The
              student in such a program would have a remarkably broad perception of
              the theoretical and practical issues in many facets of the discipline we call
              English [181, 199].

      In fact, rhetoric programs with their own graduate faculty are flourishing and research in
writing is gaining international recognition in the academy. David Chapman and Gary Tate identify
53 schools with doctoral programs in rhetoric and composition [182]. Of course, faculty members
from rhetoric have always supported research in both academic and nonacademic writing. Thus,
with the rise in status of rhetoric and composition, document design has been nurtured.

       The reconceptualizing of document design as part of the study of rhetoric. Today, document
design is viewed as a key area of rhetorical studies; but this has not always been an operating
assumptioneven among document designers. As Figure 1 (presented earlier) shows, early
characterizations of document design such as Felker's review of the literature did not include rhetoric
[1]. In fact, very little work in composition was included. If readers look carefully, they will find
                                                                                                      a
short discussion of the early Hayes and Flower work on composing in a chapter about cognitive
psychology under the heading "use of procedural information" [1, 36-39], We find that early
conceptions of the field failed to emphasize the rhetorical nature of document design.

    Fortunately, rhetoricians such as Carolyn R. Miller have helped us to recognize and
embrace the connections between rhetoric and document design [183-184]. Richard E. Young
points out that

              . .a recent reconceptualization of technical writing as essentially
             rhetorical [italics added] is producing some startling changes. This
             reorientation in thinking about technical discourse is exemplified in Merrill
             D. Whitburn's "The Ideal Orator and Literary Critic as Technical
             Communicators: An Emerging Revolution in English Departments"
             [185]; Carolyn Miller's "A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing"

                                              12          17
              [183]; and Walter B. Weimer's "Beyond Philosophical Reconstruction"
              [186] and "Science as a Rhetorical Transaction: Towarci a
              Nonjustificational Conception of Rhetoric" [187], ...Carolyn Milicr
              remarks that "without a theory of technical and scientific discourse as
              argument, asking about invention in such discourse is an irrelevant --or
              foolish -- undertaking. But with the beginning attempts to examine
              technical and scientific discourse as rhetoric, work that had seemed
              fragmented and unrelated acquire a new orientation, as though
              magnetized" [184, 152] [177, 11-12].

Reconceptualizing document design under the aegis of rhetoric connected us a history of rhetorical
studies extending from ancient Greece and Rome to the present [2]. In addition, the matrix of other
disciplines that are important to document designeach with its own historygives us a much
broader epistemological base on which to conduct new work (see Figure 2, shown earlier).

       The evolving definition of the study of literature. In the past ten years, there has been a major
change in literary studies, specifically from programs in literary studies to programs in literary and
cultural studies [188, 34]. Recent developments in literary theory are challenging antiquated
notions of the province of English departments. Literary theorists are seriously questioning the
academy's traditional focus on belletrisdc texts and are championing the expansion of literary studies
to include texts outside of the academy, including non-valorized genres and formats. In Professing
Literature, Gerald Graff lists more than a dozen departments that have reconfigured their priorities
within the last decade [189, 258]. If current hiring trends are any indication of the future, it seems
likely that as more literary and cultural theorists are hired in the 1990s, we will see a more rapid
evolution in the definition of the study of literature, and such changes may indirectly benefit the
study of document design.

       Taken together, these three changes in U.S. English departmentsthe rising status of rhetoric
and composition, the reconceptualizing of document design as part of the study of rhetoric, and the
evolving definition of the study of literaturerepresent the lifting of significant institutional and
intellectual constraints on the study of document design within the U.S. academy.

      Unfortunately, because of parallel misconceptions about the intellectual integrity of
studying writing, document design is rarely taught in the academy outside of the U.S. However,
there are beginning to be very hopeful signs in Britain [190], West Germany [191], and Canada
[192]. Classes in writing and document design are starting to emerge in universities and colleges
and a few institutions are mounting degree programs. There is also a great deal of interest in
developing educational programs at the university and college level in Japan [193], Australia
[194], and Africa [195].

      As the academy's skeptical attitudes toward studying document design change, progress will
be made, particularly in developing theory and research and relating such work to practice.
Moreover, it also looks as though the academy's longstanding dichotomy between basic and applied
research is beginning to abate.

The Second Problem: Lack of Funding from Government and Industry for Research
      Since the original U.S. government-sponsored Document Design Project (1978-1981) there
have been no major funds for document design research coming from the U.S. government. And
there h, ve been very few grants available to researchers in other countries.

      Like government, industry has been slow in funding nonproprietary basic and applied research
in document design. Many multinational corporations look at document design as a necessary but
low-profile activity to help make their products more attractive and usable. When companies do fund
document design work, it is typically "to put out fires," that is, to fix a particular document that isn't
functioning well. It is unfortunaY; that government and industry often fail to see that funding basic
and applied research could help them to solve reoccurring communication problems.

                                               13 18
                   What are the relationships among cognitive, social, and cuiturai factors
                   in document design?

                   Are there differences between writers and readers across cultures? Do
                   the same writing strategies, for example, work for Japanese and English
                   speaking audiences? Do readers in various cultures read and access
                   information in similar ways?

                   What is the relation between oral and written communication in social
                   contexts? For example, how does oral and written language work
                   together in educational, government or corporate contexts? Are there
                   culture-specific patterns?

                  What is the role of writers' knowledge in document design?
                  Subject-matter knowledge? Linguistic knowledge? Perceptual
                  knowledge? Strategic knowledge? Rhetorical knowledge?

                  What constitutes skill in document design? What do document designers
                  need to know to become expert? What experiences do they need?

                  What is the best means for soliciting subject matter knowledge from
                  experts? How should writers without subject-matter expertise proceed?

                  How can research on reading best be applied to document design?

                  What are the principles underlying the visual design of effective text? Do
                  some visual information structures meet readers' needs better than others?

                  What are the best strategies for designing texts that serve multlpk funce^ns,
                  for example, to inform and persuade?

                  How does collaboration with other experts shape the nature of the document
                  design process? What are optimal collaboration points among people (e.g.,
                  writers, designers, and subject-matter experts) contributing to the same text?

                 How can technology facilitate the document design process? What
                 constraints does technology place on the document design process? What
                 are the key features of a user interface that would best support collaborative
                 document design?

                 How do the needs of expert audiences differ from those of lay audiences?
                 How can the needs of multiple audiences best be addressed?

                 Which text-evaluation methods are best suited for judging text quality?
                 At what point(s) in the document design process are particular text-evaluation
                 methods most useful, e.g., what tests should be used for first drafts? Can we
                 develop more sensitive text-evaluation methods than are currently available?
                 Are there effective combinations of existing methods?

                 What do writers learn from testing documents and observing readers
                 interacting with text? Are there long-term benefits? Can we consolidate this
                 learning and teach it more directly?

                 What are the most likely candidate text features for building online text
                 critiquers? Can the computer help us in text evaluation more than it has?




Figure 3. An agenda of research questions for document design in the 1990s.



                                                 14
                                                               19
      Because government and industry tend to fund "revisions of X" or "guidelines for Y,"
document designers have generated a lot of excellent solutions to local communication problems.
But we are failing to get a handle on the global problems: problems that transcend company and
product lines, that transcend our international borders. It is only through addressing the global
issues that document design will become a powerful and respected discipline.


A RESEARCH AGENDA FOR DOCUMENT DESIGN IN THE 1990s
       Given the current situation, it is not surprising that some people from the academy aid from
government and industry say that document design does not really have a research agenda and that
our concerns are hopelessly fragmented. As we head into the next decade, it seems imperative that
we act to mitigate such perceptions by working on a research agenda that grows both out of what we
know and what we do not. Our research agenda should enrich our understanding of the complex
relations among the five research clusters discussed earlier (that is, work focused on write-%
readers, text design, text evaluation, and communication technologies). Although it is necessarily
incomplete, I propose the set of questions shown in Figure 3 as a research agenda for document
design in the 1990s. The cumulative effect of addressing such questions would put document design
on the research map. And before long other disciplines will look to our work for ideas.

      Despite the problems related to studying document design, research is flourishing in some
U.S. English departments which offer a PhD in rhetoric, as well as in some departments of
educational psychology, applied psychology, cognitive psychology, instructional design,
information science, engineering, agriculture, and educational technology. Research is also being
conducted in industrial research labs and in non-profit government- or university-sponsored research
centers in the U.S., Canada, U.K., and Australia.

      I am optimistic that the next ten years will mark a turning point in document design research
internationally. It seems likely that more educational institutions around the world will recognize that
a comprehensive theory of discourse must account for texts outside of the academy. This awareness
should lead to a more supportive and less isolated intellectual environment for document design
researchers in universities. It also seems likely that government and industry around the world will
become more concerned with understanding the communication practices of other cultures. Such an
interest will bring into focus the need for more research in document design and that recognition may
lead government and industry to develop collaborative efforts to fund research on those problems
that unite us.


Acknowledgments

      I want to thank John R. Hayes for encouraging me to write this article and for his insightful
analysis and kind advice in critiquing drafts of this text; Erwin R. Steinberg and Brad Mehlenbacher
for providing me with valuable comments and questions about this text; Richard E. Young for
helping me to understand the relations between rhetoric and document design; and Frank R. Smith,
who urged me to characterize what's been happening in document design over the last decade. I also
want to thank the many people who have contributed to the study of document design; without their
scholarship, this text would not have been possible.




                                             15    20
                                              REFERENCES
     1.     Daniel B. Felker, ed., Document Design: A Relevant Review of the
                                                                             Literature (Washington,
            DC: American Institutes for Research, 1980).
  2.        Karen A. Schriver, "Theory Building in Rhetoric and Composition: The Role of Empirical
            Scholarship," Rhetoric Review 7, no. 2 (Spring 1989): 272-288.
  3.        Nancy Spivey, "Construing Constructivism: Reading Research in the United
            15 (1987): 169-192.                                                      States," Poetics

 4.        Karen A. Schriver, John R. Hayes, Carol Danley, Wendie Wulff, Lisa Davies, Debra
           Graham, Karen Cerroni, and Eric Bond, Designing Computer
                                                                       Documentation: A Review of
           the Relevant Literature--Hardcopy, Online, and General Applications,
                                                                                Communications
           Design Center Technical Report # 31 (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
           Communications Design Center, 1986).
 5.        Terrence Deal and Allen A, Kennedy, Corporate Cultures (Massachusetts:
                                                                                  Addison Wesley
           Publishing Company, 1982).
 6.        Lee Odell, "Beyond the Text: Relations Between Writing and Social
                                                                             Context," in Writing in
           Nonacademic Settings, eds. Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami (New York, NY: Guilford Press,
           1985): 249-280.
 7.        Paul V. Anderson, Carolyn R. Miller, and R. John Brockman, eds., New Essays in
           Technical and Scientific Communication (New York, NY: Baywood Press,
           Michael G. Moran and Debra Journet, eds., Research in Technical        1983). Also see,
                                                                           Communication: A
           Bibliographic Sourcebook (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985).
 8.        Carl Bereiter and Marlene Scardamalia, The Psychology of Written
           NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1987).                          Composition (Hillsdale,

9.         H. Bouma and B. Elsendoorn, eds., Working Models of Human
           Academic Press, 1988).                                    Perception (London, UK:

 10.      Thomas Duffy and Robert Waller, eds., Designing Usable Texts (New York, NY: Academic
          Press, 1985).
11.        Daniel B. Felker, F. Pickering, V. R. Charrow, V. M. Holland, and J. Redish, Guidelines
          for Document Designers (Washington, DC: American Institutes for
           see Jonathan Pncc, How to Write a Computer Manual: A HandbookResearch,       1981). Also,
                                                                              of Software
           Documentation (Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin Cummings, 1984).
12.       Carl Felsenfeld and Alan Siegel, Writing Contracts in Plain English
                                                                              (St. Paul, MN: West
          Publishing Co., 1981). Also, see Joseph Williams, Style: Ten Lessons
          2nd ed. (Chicago, IL: Scott, Foresman Company, 1985); and              in Clarity and Grace
                                                                       George Gopen, "The
          state of Legal Writing: Res Ipsa Loquitur," Michigan. Law Review
                                                                             86 (1987): 333-380.
13.       Dixie Goswami, Janice Redish, Daniel Felker, and Alan Siegel,
                                                                        Wrling in the Professions
          (Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research, 1981).
14.       Lee Gregg and Erwin R. Steinberg, eds., Cognitive Processes
                                                                      in Writing: An
          Interdisciplinary Approach (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1980).
15.       James Hartley, Designing Instructional Text, 2nd ed. (London,
          1985).                                                          UK: Kogan Page Ltd.,


                                                       16    21
 16.    John R. Hayes, The Complete Problem Solver, 2nd ed. (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
        Associates, 1989). Also, see John R. Hayes, "Writing Research: The Analysis of a Very
        Complex Task," in Complex Information Processing: The Impact of Herbert A. Simon,
        eds. David Klahr and Ker.neth Kotovsky (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
        1989): 209-234.

 17.    David H. Jonassen, ed., The Technology of Text, Vol. 1 (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
        Educational Technology Publications, 1982).
 18.    David H. Jonassen, ed., The Technology of Text, Vol. 2 (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
        Educational Technology Publications, 1985).
 19.    Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter, eds., Cognitive Processes in Comprehension
        (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977). Also, see Marcel A. Just and Patricia
        A. Carpenter, The Psychology of Reading and Language Comprehension (Boston, MA:
        Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 1987).

20.     P. A. Kolers, M. D. Wrolstad, and H. Bouma, eds., Processing Visible Language 2 (New
        York, NY: Plenum Press, 1980).

21.    M. MacDonald-Rocs, "Graphics in Text," in Review of Research in Education, ed. L. S.
       Shulman (Itasca, IL: F.E. Peacock Publishers, Inc., 1977).
22.    Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami, "Writing in a Non-academic Setting," Research in the
       Teaching of English 16, no. 3 (1982): 201-223.
23.    Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami, Writing in Nonacademic Settings (New York, NY: Guilford
       Press, 1985).

24.    Rolf F. Rehe, Typography: How to Make it Most Legible, 4th ed. (Cannel, IN: Design
       Research International, 1981). Also, see James Craig, Designing with Type: A Basic Cuurse
       in Typography (New York, NY: Watson-Guptill Publications, 1980).
25.    Herbert A. Simon, Sciences of the Artificial, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981).
26.    Erwin R. Steinberg, ed., Plain Language: Principles and Practice (Detroit, MI: Wayne State
       University Press, in press). Also, see S. Michael Halloran and Merrill D. Whitburn,
       "Ciceronian Rhetoric and the Rise of Science: The Plain Style Reconsidered," in The
       Rhetorical Tradition and Modern Writing ed. James J. Murphy (New York, NY: Modem
       Language Association, 1982).

27.    Joyce Swaney, Carol Janik, Sandra J. Bond, and John R. Hayes, "Editing for
       Comprehension: Improving the Process Through Reading Protocols," Document Design
       Project Technical Report, No. 9 (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
       Communications Design Center, 1981).

28.    Dale M. Willows and Harvey A. Houghton, eds., The Psychology of Illustration, Vol. 1,
       Basic Research (New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1987). Also, see Harvey A. Houghton
       and Dale M. Willows, eds., The Psychology of Illustration, Vol. 2, Instructional Issues
       (New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1987).

29.    Patricia Wright, "Presenting Technical Information: A Survey of Research Findings,"
       Instructional Science 6 (1977): 93-134.
30.    Patricia Wright, "Feeding the Information Eaters: SuggeF -3 for Integrating Pure and
       Applied Research on Language Comprehension," Instructional Science 7 (1978): 249-312.

                                                    1
                                                        2
 31.    Patricia Wright, "Writing Technical Information," in Review of Research in Education 14,
        ed. E. 1 Rothkopf (Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association, 1987):
        327-385.

 32.    Patricia Wright, "Functional Literacy: Reading and Writing at Work," Ergonomics 31 (1988):
        265-290.

 33.    Marshall Atlas, "Addressing an Audience: A Study of Expert-Novice Differences in
        Writing," Document Design Project Technical ReportNo. 3 (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie
        Mellon University, Communications Design Center, 1979).
 34.    Sandra J. Bond and John R. Hayes, "Cues People Use to Paragraph Text," Research in the
        Teaching of English 18, no. 9 (1984): 147-167.
 35.    Glenn J. Broadhead and Richard C. Freed, The Variables of Composition: Process and
        Product in a Business Setting (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 1986).
 36.    John R. Hayes and Linda Flower, "Identifying the Organization of Writing Processes," in
        Cognitive Processes in Writing: An Interdisciplinary Approach, eds. Lee Gregg and Erwin
        R. Steinberg (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1980): 3-30.
 37.   V. Melissa Holland, A. M. Rose, A. R. Dean, and S. L. Dory, "Processes Involved in
       Writing Effective Procedural Instructions," Office of Naval Research (ONR) Technical
       Report No. / (Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research, 1985).
38.    Steven P. Witte, "Topical Structure in Revision: An Exploratory Study," College
       Composition and Communication 34 (1983): 313-341. Also, see Lester Faigley and Steven
       P. Witte, "Analyzing Revision," College Composition and Communication 4 (December
       1981): 400-414. Also, see E J. Bartlett, "Learning to Revise: Some Component
       Processes," in What Writers Know, ed. Martin Nystrand (New York, NY: Academic Press,
       1982).

39.    Linda Flower, John R. Hayes, and Heidi S warts, "Revising Functional Documents: The
       Scenario Principle," in New Essays in Technical and Scientific Communication, eds. Paul V.
       Anderson, R. John Brockman, and Carolyn R. Miller (New York, NY: Baywood Press,
       1983): 41-58.

40.    Linda Flower, John R. Hayes, Linda Carey, Karen A. Schriver, and James F. Stratman,
       "Detection, Diagnosis, and the Strategies of Revision," College Composition and
       Communication 37, no. 1 (1986): 16-55. Also, see John R. Hayes, Linda Flower, Karen
       A. Schriver, James F. Stratman, and Linda Carey, "Cognitive Processes in Revision," in
       Advances in Applied Psycholinguistics, Vol. 2: Reading, Writing, and Language Learning,
       ed. Sheldon Rosenberg (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987):176-240.
41.    Linda Flower, Karen A. Schriver, Christina Haas, Linda Carey, and John R. Hayes,
       "Planning in Writing: The Cognition of a Constructive Process," to appear in A Rhetoric of
       Doing, eds. Steven P. Witte, N. Nakadote, and Roger Cherry (Carbondale, IL: Southern
       Illinois Press, in press).
42.    Ann R. Gere, Writing Groups: History, Theory, and Implications (Carbondale, IL:
       Southern Illinois Press, 1987).
43.    John R. Hayes, Karen A. Schriver, Andrea Blaustein, and Rachel Spilka, "If It's Clear to
       Me, It Must Be Clear to Them," paper presented at the Conference on College Composition
       and Communication, New Orleans, LA (1986). Also discussed in John R. Hayes, "Writing
      Research: The Analysis of a Very Complex Task," in Complex Information Processing: The
      Impact of Herbert A. Simon, eds. David Klahr and Kenneth Kotovsky (Hillsdale, NJ:
      Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1989): 209-234.
44.   Glynda A. Hull, "The Editing Process in Writing: A Performance Study of More Skilled and
      Less Skilled College Writers," Research in the Teaching of English 21 (1987): 8-29.
45.   David Kaufer, Erwin Steinberg, and Sarah Toney, "Revising Medical Consent Forms: An
      Empirical Test and Model," Law Medicine & Health Care 11, no. 4 (1983): 155-163.
46.   Ann Matsuhashi and E. Gordon, "Revision, Addition, and the Power of the Unseen Text,"
      in The Acquisition of Written Language: Response and Revision, ed. Sarah W. Freedman
      (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985): 226-249; and Ann Matsuhashi, "Pausing and Planning:
      The Tempo of Written Discourse Production," Research in the Teaching of English 15 (May
      1981): 113-134. See also, Ann Matsuhashi and K. Quinn, "Cognitive Questions from
      Discourse Analysis: A Review and a Study," Written Communication 1 (1984): 307-339.
47.   Max Morenberg, Donald Daiker, and Andrew Kerek, "Sentence Combining at the College
      Level: An Experimental Study," Research in the Teaching of English 12, no. 3 (1978):
      245-256.

48.   Donald Rubin and Bennett Rafoth, "Social Cognitive Ability as a Predictor of Quality of
      Expository and Persuasive Writing Among College Freshman," Research in the Teaching of
      English 20 (1986): 9-21.

49.   Marlene Scardamalia and Carl Bereiter, "The Development of Evaluative, Diagnostic, and
      Remedial Capabilities in Children's Composing," in The Psychology of Written Language: A
      Developmental Approach, ed. M. Matlew (London, UK: John Wiley and Sons, 1983).
50.   Karen A. Schriver, "Teaching Writers to Anticipate the Reader's Needs: Empirically Based
      Instruction," Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
      Department of English, 1987). For a summary of this work, see "Teaching Writers to
      Anticipate the Reader's Needs: An Empirically Evaluated Pedagogy," Center for the Study of
      Writing Technical Report (Berkeley, C4 and Pittsburgh, PA: University of California and
      Carnegie Mellon, Center for the Study of Writing, 1989, in press). A detailed version of
      this work is in preparation for the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) Research
      Monograph Series (Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English).

51.   Gary M. Schumacher, Byron T. Scott, George R. Klare, Frank C. Cronin, and Donald A.
      Lambert, "Cognitive Processes in Journalistic Genres: Extending Writing Models," Written
      Communication 6, no. 3 (July 1989): 390-407. Also, see Gary M. Schumacher, George R.
      Klare, Frank C. Cronin, and J. R. Moses, "Cognitive Activities of Beginning and Advanced
      College Writers: A Pausal Analysis," Research in the Teaching of English 18 (1984):
      169-187.

52.   Charles Bazerman, "Scientific Writing as a Social Act: A Review of the Literature of the
      Sociology of Science," in New Essays in Technical and Scientific Communication, eds.
      Paul V. Anderson, R. John Brockman, and Carolyn R. Miller (New York, NY: Baywood
      Press, 1983): 156-184. Also, see Lester Faigley, "Nonacademic Writing: The Social
      Perspective," in Writing in Nonacademic Settings, eds. Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami (New
      York, NY: Guilford Press, 1985): 231-248.

53.   Carol Lipson, "A Social View of Technical Writing," Iowa State Journal ofBusiness and
      Technical Communication 2, no. 1 (1988): 7-20.
 54.    Deborah McCutchen, "Sources of Developmental Differences in Children's Writing:
        Knowledge of Topic and Knowledge of Discourse and Linguistic Form," Diss. in
        Psychology (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh, 1985).
 55.    James F. Voss, T. R. Greene, T. A. Post, and B. C. Penner, "Problem Solving Skills in the
        Social Sciences,"     ,se Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and
        Theory, Vol. 17, ed. G. Bower (New York: Academic Press, 1983).
 56.    Karen A. Schriver, John R. Hayes, Erwin R. Steinberg, Ayami Ogura, and Joel Bloch,
        "Connecting Writing Knowledge and Subject Matter Knowledge: Studies of Writers'
        Processes and Products," Communications Design Center Technical Report (Pittsburgh, PA:
        Carnegie Mellon, in preparation).
 57.    Greg Myers, "The Social Construction of Two Biologists' Proposals," Written
        Communication 2, no. 3 (1985): 219-245.
 58.    Anna Skinner, "Writing in a Law Firm: Cognitive Processes and Texts Grounded in Social
        Knowledge," Doctoral Diss. in English (Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin,
        Department of English, 1988).
 59.    Barbara Couture, "Effect Ideation in Written Text: A Functional Approach to Clarity and
        Exigence," in Functional Approaches to Writing: Research Perspectives, ed. Barbara Couture
        (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1986): 69-92.
 60.    Russell K. Durst, "Cognitive and Linguistic Demands of Analytic Writing," Research in the
        Teaching of English 21 (1987): 347-376. Also, see Russell K. Durst, "Monitoring
        Processes in Analytic and Summary Writing," Written Communication 6, no. 3 (July 1989):
        340-363.
61.    Michael A. K. Halliday, An Introduction to Functional Grammar (London, England: Edward
       Arnold Publishing, 1985). Also, see Gunther Kress, Linguistic Processes in Sociocultural
       Practice (Victoria, Australia: Deakin University Press, 1985).
62.    Linda Flower, "Negotiating Academic Discourse," Center for the Study of Writing Technical
       Report, No. 29 ( Berkeley, CP and Pittsburgh, PA: University of California at Berkeley and
       Carnegie Mellon: Center for the Study of Writing, 1989).
63.    James F. Stratman, "The Rhetorical Dynamics of Appellate Court Persuasion: An
       Exploratory Comparison of Advocates' Brief Composing Process with Court Clerks' Brief
       Reading and Review Process," Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon
       University, Department of English, 1988).
64.    Richard 0. Young, "Cognitive Processes in Argumentation: An Exploratory Study of
       Expertise in Management Consulting," Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie
       Mellon University, Department of English, 1989).
65.    John R. Hayes and Karen A. Schriver, "Perceptual Knowledge in Writing," Center for the
       Study of Writing Technical Report (Berkeley, CA and Pittsburgh, PA: University of
       California at Berkeley and Carnegie Mellon: Center for the Study of Writing, in preparation).
66.    John R. Hayes, "What's Happened to the Hayes and Flower Model of Composing Over
                                                                                           the
       Last Ten Years?" (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology,
       in preparation); and John R. Hayes, "Empiricism and Commonsense," (Pittsburgh, PA:
       Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, in preparation).



                                                     20    25
 67.   John Seely Brown, Allan Collins, and Paul Duguid, "Situated Cognition and the Culture of
       Learning," Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. Report No. 6886 (Cambridge, MA: Bolt
       Beranek and Newman, Inc., December 1988). Also, see a shorter version of this paper
       which appears in Educational Researcher 18, no. 1 (January-Feburary 1989): 32-42;
       Annmarie Sullivan Palincsar, "Less Charted Waters," Educational Researcher 18, no. 4
       (May 1989): 5-7; Samuel S. Wineburg, "Remembrance of Theories Past,"
       Educational Researcher 18, no. 4 (May 1989): 7-10; and John Seely Brown, Allan
       Collins, and Paul Duguid,"Debating the Situation: A Rejoinder to Palincsar and Wineburg,"
       Educational Researcher 18, no. 4 (May 1989): 10-12.

68.    B. Rogoff and J. Lave, eds., Everyday Cognition: Its Development in Social Context
       (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984). Also, see Lauren B. Resnick,
       "Learning in School and Out," Educational Researcher 16, no. 9 (088): 13-20; David N.
       Perkins and Gavriel Salomon, "Are Cognitive Skills Context-Bound?' .g.'ducational
       Researcher 18, no. 1 (January-February 1989): 16-25; and Rand J. Spiro, W. L.
       Vispoel, J. G. Schmitz, A. Samarapungavan, and A. E. Buerger, "Knowledge Acquisition
       for Application: Cognitive Flexibility and Transfer in Complex Content Domains," Center for
       the Study of Reading Technical Report No. 409 (Champaign-Urbana, IL: University of
       Illinois, Center for the Study of Reading, 1987).

69.    Allan Collins, John Seely Brown, and Susan E. Newman, "Cognitive Apprenticeship:
       Teaching the Craft of Reading, Writing, and Mathematics," in Knowing, Learning, and
       Instruction: Essays in Honor of Robert Glaser, ed. Lauren B. Resnick (Hillsdale, NJ:
       Erlbaurn, 1989). Originally circulated as Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. Report No. 6459
       (Cambridge, MA: Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc., November 1986).
70.    J. Lave, Cognition in Practice (Boston, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1988). Also, see
       S. Scribner and M. Cole, The Psychology of Literacy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
       Press, 1981).

71.    Paul V. Anderson, "What Survey Research Tells Us About Writing at Work," in Writing in
       Nonacademic Settings, eds. Lee Odell and Dixie Goswami (New York, NY: Guilford Press,
       1985): 3-83.

72.    Stephen Doheny-Farina, "Writing in an Emergent Business Organization: An Ethnographic
       Study," Doctoral Diss. (Troy, NY: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 191/4).
73.    Rachel Spilka, "Studying Writer-Reader Interactions in the Workplace," The Technical
       Writing Teacher 15, no. 3 (Fall 1988): 208-221.
74.    Brad Mehlenbacher, "Negotiating the Demands Between Basic and Applied Research:
       How Scientists in the Academy Write Proposals for Research Funding," Doctoral
       Diss. in Rhetoric and Document Design (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
       Department of English, in preparation).

75.    Wendie Wulff, "Collaboration in Document Design: A Case Study of Process and Product,"
       Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric and Document Design (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon
       University, Department of English, in preparation).
76.    Christina Haas, "How the Writing Medium Shapes the Writing Process: Studies of Writers
       Composing with Pen and Paper and with Word Processing," Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric
       (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Department of English, 1987).
77.    Cynthia Selfe and Billie J. Walstrom, "Computers and Writing: Casting a Broader Net with
       Theory and Research," Computers and the Humanities, 1 (1988): 57-66.



                                                   2t 6
  78.       Christina Haas and John R. Hayes, "What Did I Just Say? Reading Problems in Writing
            with the Machine," Research in the Teaching ofEnglish 20. no. 1 (1986): 22-35.
  -, 9.    Lucy A. Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Hwnan Machine
           Communication (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987). Also, see Terry
           Winograd and Fernando Flores, Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New
           Foundation for Design (Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing, 19O6).
 80.       Richard C. Anderson, R. E. Reynolds, Diane L. Schallert, and E. T. Goetz, "Frameworks
           for Understanding Discourse," American Educational Research Journal 15 (1977): 433-450.
           Also, see D. E. Rumelhart, "Schemata: The Building Blocks of Cognition," in Theoretical
           Issues in Reading Comprehension eds. R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, and W. F. Brewer
           (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1980).

 81. L Baker and Ann L Prown. "Metacognitive Skills in Reading," in Handbook of Reading
      Research Vol. 1, ed. I. D. Pearson (New York, Isrv: 'Longman, 1984): 353-394. Also, see
           R. Garner, Metacognition and Reading Comprehension (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1986).
 82.       Isabel L beck, "Toward Improving Instructional Practice Through Understanding Reading,"
           in Cognitive Research in Subject-Matter Learning, eds. L Resnick and L Klopfer
           (Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, in press).
 83.       Sandra 3. Bond, John R. Hayes, and Linda Flower, "Translating the Law into Common
           Language: A Protocol Study," Document Design Project Technical Report No. 8 (Pittsburgh,
           °P.: Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center. 1980).
 84.       John Bransford, Human Cognition: Learning, Understanding, and Remembering (Belmont,
           CA: Wadsworth, 1979).
 85.      Ann L. Brown, "Metacognition: The Development of Selective Attention Strategies for
          Learning from Texts," in Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading 3rd ed., eds. H.
          Singer and R. B. Ruddell, (Newark, DE: International Reading Association and Erlbaum,
          1985): 501-526.

 86.      Kenneth S. Goodman, "A Linguistic Study of Cues and Miscues in Reading," in Theoretical
          Models and Processes of Reading 3rd ed., eds. H. Singer and R. B. Ruddell (Newark, DE:
          International Reading Association and Erlbaum, 1985): 129-134.
87.       Carol Janik, Joyce Swaney, Sandra J. Bond, and John R. Hayes, "Informed Consent:
          Reality or Illusion?" Information Design Journal 2, no. 3 & 4 (1981): 197-207.
88.       David E. Keiras, "Thematic Processes in the Comprehension of Technical Prose," in
          Understanding Expository Text: A Theoretical and Practical Handbook for Analyzing
          Explanatory Text, eds. Bruce K. Britton and John B. Black (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1985):
          89-107.

89.       Richard E. Mager, ' Structural Analysis of Science Prose: Can We Increase Problem-Solving
          Performance?" in Understanding Expository Text: A Theoretical and hactical Handbookfor
          Analyzing Explanatory Text, eds. Bruce K. Britton and John B. Black (Hillsdale, NJ:
          Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1985): 65-87.
90.       Mary Lundeberg, "Metacognitive Aspects of Reading Comprehension: Understanding in
          Legal Case Analysis," Reading Research Quarterly 22, no. 4 (1987): 408-432.




                                                            7
                                                      222
        91.   G. J. Spilich, G. T. Vesonder, H. L. Chiesi, and J. F. Voss, "Text Processing of
              Domain-Related Information for Individuals with High and Low Domain Knowledge,"
              Journal of Verbal Learning and Behavior 18 (1979): 275-290.
        92.   Thomas Sticht, "Comprehending Reading at Work," in Cognitive Processes in
              Comprehension, eds. Marcel A. Just and Patricia A. Carpenter (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
              Erlbaum Associates, 1977): 221-246.
        93.   Thomas Sticht, "Understanding Readers and Their Uses of Text," in Designing Usable
              Texts, eds. Thomas Duffy and Robert Waller (New York, NY: Academia Press, 1985).
    Y
        94.   J. F. Voss and G. L. Bisanz, "Knowledge and the Processing of Narrative and Expository
              Texts," in Understanding Expository Text: A Theoretical and Practical Handbook for
              Analyzing Explanatory Text, eds. Bruce K. Britton and John B. Black (Hillsdale, NJ:
              Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1985): 173-198.
        95.   Patricia Wright, "The Need for Theories of NOT Reading: Some Psychological Aspects of
              the Human-Computer Interface," in Working Models of Human Perception, eds. H. Bouma
              and B. Elsendoorn (London, England: Academic Press, 1988).
        96.   Lisa Ede and Andrea Lunsford, "Audience Addressed/Audience Invoked: The Role of
              Audience in Composition Theory and Pedagogy," College Composition and Communication
              35 (1984): 155-171.

        97.   A. Chapanis, N. S. Anderson, and J. C. Licklider, Research Needs for Human Factors:
              User Computer Interaction (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University, US Army
              Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, 1983).

        98.   D. N. Chin, "User Modeling in the UC, the UNIX Consultant," in Proceedings of the 1986
              Computer and Human Interaction (CHI) Conference (New York, NY: Association for
              Computing Machinery, 1986): 24-28.
        99.   S. W. Draper, "The Nature of Expertise in UNIX," in User Centered System Design: Part I 1,
              Collected Papers from the UCSD HMI Project, Institute of Cognitive Science Report No.
              8402 (San Diego, CA : University of CA, Institute for Human Information Processing,
              1984): 19-27.

        100. K. Potosnak, "Choice of Computer Interface Modes by Empirically Derived Categories of
             Users," Doctoral Diss. (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University, 1983). Also, see
             Nathaniel Borenstein, 'The Design and Evaluation of On-line Help Systems," Doctoral Diss.
             in Computer Science (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Computer
             Science).

        101. K. Potosnak, P. Hayes, M. Rosson, M. Schneider, and J. Whiteside, "Classifying Users:
             Taking a Hard Look at Some Controversial Issues," in Proceedings of the 1986 Computer
             and Human interaction (CHI) Conference (114,,w York, NY: Association of Computing
             Machinery, 1986): 84-88.

        102. Karen A. Schriver and John R. Hayes, "Defining Computer User Groups: An Empirical
             Approach Using Cluster Analysis," Communications Design Center Technical Report
             (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center, in
             preparation).

        103. John R. Anderson, The Architecture of Cognition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
             Press, 1983). Also, see Michciene T. Chi, Robert Glaser, and Marshall J. Farr, eds., The
             Nature of Expertise (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988).


                                                          23      28
[
 104. P. N. Johnson-Laird, Mental Models (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
      Also, see Arthur M. Glenberg, Marion Meyer, and Karen Linden, "Mental Models
      Contribute to Foregrounding During Text Comprehension," Journal of Memory and
      Language, 26, no. 1 (1987): 69-83.

 105. D. E. Keiras and S. Bovair, "The Role of a Mental Model in Learning to Operate a Device,"
      Technical Report No. 13 UARZ/DP/TR-83/0NR-13 (Tucson, AR: University of Arizona,
      Department of Psychology, 1983).

 106. Patricia Wright, "Manual Dexterity: A User-Oriented Approach to Creating Computer
      Documentation," in Proceedings of the Association for Computing Machinery's Computer
      and Human Interaction (CHI) Conference (New York, NY: Association for Computing
      Machinery, 1983): 11-18.

 107. George Hillocks, Research in Written Composition: New Directions for Teaching (Urbana,
      IL: ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills and NCRE, 1986.)

 108. Peter Rosseel, Anne-Marie Cornu, and Cathy Groenendaels, "The Impact of the Rate of
      Production in Cross-Cultural Negotiation," in Proceedik of the 1989 International
      Technical Communication Conference (Washington, DC: Society of Technical
      Communication, 1989): RT-18RT-21.
 109. Patricia Wright, "Can Research Assist Technical Communication?" in Proceedings of the
       1989 International Technical Communication Conference (Washington, DC: Society of
      Technical Communication, 1989): RT-3RT-6. Also, see Patricia Wright, "Five Skills
      Technical Writers Need," IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication PC-24 (1981):
      10-16.

110. Thomas Duffy and Paula Kabance, "Testing a Readable Writing Approach to Text Revision,"
     Journal of Educational Psychology 74, no. 5 (1982): 733-748.

111. Thomas Huckin, "A Cognitive Approach to Readability," in New Essays in Scientific and
     Technical Communication, eds. Paul V. Anderson, R. John Brockman, and Carolyn R.
     Miller (New York, NY: Baywood Press, 1983): 90-108. Alm, see Jack Seltzer, "What
     Constitutes a 'Readable' Technical Style?" in New Essays in Scientific and Technical
     Communication, eds. Paul V. Anderson, R. John Brockman, and Carolyn R. Miller (New
     York, NY: Baywood Press, 1983): 71-89.

112. William J. Vande Kopple, "Something Old, Something New: The Functional Sentence
     Perspective," Research in the Teaching of English 17, no. 1 (February 1983): 85-99.

113. Leslie A. Olson and Rod Johnson, "Towards a Better Measure of Readability: Explanation
     of Empirical Performance Results," in Proceedings of the 1989 International Technical
     Communication Conference (Washington, DC: Society of Technical Communication, 1989):
     RT-7RT-10.
114. David Keiras, "Abstracting Main Ideas from Technical Prose: A Preliminary Study of Six
     Passages," Technical Report # 5 (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona, 19W). Also, see
     Connie A. Bridge, Susan M. Belmore, Susan P. Moskow, Sheila S. Cohen, 'nd Patricia D.
     Matthews, "Topicalization and Memory for Main Ideas in Prose," Journal of Reading
     Behavior 16, no. 1(1984): 61-80.
115. Rick Eden and Ruth Mitchell, "Paragraphing for the Reader," College Composition and
     Communication 37, no. 4 (1986): 416-430.



                                                 24 29
116. Michael A. K. Halliday and Ruciaiya Hasan, Cohesion in English (London, England:
     Longman, 1976).

117. Teun A. van Dijk and Walter Kintsch, Strategies of Discourse Comprehension (New York,
     NY: Academic Press, 1983).

118. Steven P. Witte and Lester Faigley, "Coherence, Cohesion, and Writing Quality," College
     Composition and Communication 32 (1981): 189-204. Also, see George A. McCulley,
     "Writing Quality, Coherence, and Cohesion," Research in the Teaching of English 19, no. 3
     (October 1985): 269-282.

119. R. R. Kern, T. G. Sticht, D. Welty, and R, N. Hauke, Guidebook for the Development of
     Army Training literature (Washington, DC: US Army Research Institute for the Behavioral
     and Social Sciences, Human Resources Organization, 1976).

120. Heidi Swarts, Linda Flower and John R. Hayes, "How Headings in Documents Can Mislead
     Readers," Document Design Project Technical Report No. 9 (Piasburgh, PA: Carnegie
     Mellon University, Communications Design Center, 1980).

121. Jan H. Spyridalds and T. C. Standal, "Headings, Previews, Logical Connectives: Effects on
     Reading Comprehension," Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 16 (1986):
     343-354.

122. Jeff Pepper, "Following Students' Instructions for Writing a Computer Programming
     Textbook," American Educational Research Journal 18 (1981): 259-269. Also, see A.
      Pollchik, "The Use of Embedded Questions in the Facilitation of Productive Learning,"
     Dwtoral Diss. (Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University, Department of Psychology, 1975).

123. Lynn Reder, Davida Charney, and K. Morgan, "The Role of Elaborations in Learning a Skill
     from an Instructional Text," Memory and Cognition 14 (1986): 64-78.

124. John M. Carroll and J. C. Thomas, "Metaphor and the Cognitive Representation of
     Computing Systems," IBM Research Report No. RC 8302 # 35942 (Yorktown Heights,
     NY: IBM Watson Research Center, 1980).

125. D. Gentner, "Structure Mapping: A Theoretical Framework for Analogy," Cognitive Science
     7 (1983): 155-170. Also, see D. Gentner and D. R. Gentner, "Flowing Waters or Teaming
     Crowds: Mental Models of Electricity," in Mental Models, eds. D. Gentner and A. L
     Stevens (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, 1983).

126. Raizi Janus and Thomas G. Bever, "Processing of Metaphoric Language: An Investigation
     of the Three-Stage Model of Metaphor Comprehension," Journal of Psycholinguistic
     Research 14, no. 5 (September 1985): 473-487. Also, see Marc Marschark and R. Reed
     Hunt, "On Memory for Metaphor," Memory and Cognition 13, no. 5 (September 1985):
     413-424.

127. S. Michael Halloran and Annette Norris Bradford, "Figures of Speech in the Rhetoric of
     Science and Technology," in Essays on Classical Rhetoric and Modern Discourse, eds.
     Robert J. Connors, Lisa S. Ede, and Andrea A. Lunsford (Carbondale, IL: Southern Dlinois
     Press, 1984): 179-192.

128. Lorraine Higgins, John R. Hayes, and Rebecca Burnett, "Designing Instructional Text:
     Metaphor as Explanatory Strategy," (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
     Department of English, in preparation).



                                                 25
                                                          30
 129. Candice Soderston and Carol German, "Toward Bridging the Gap Between Theory and
      Practice: Analogy and Person in Technical Communication," Iowa Journal of Business and
      Technical Communication 2, no. 1 (January 1988): 79-102.

 130. Rand J. Spiro, Paul J. Feltovich., Richard L. Coulson, and Daniel K. Anderson, "Multiple
      Analogies for Complex Concepts: Antidotes for Analogy-Induced Misconception in
      Advanced Knowledge Acquisition," in Similarity and Analogical Reasoning, eds. S.
      Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, in press). Also,
      see Paul J. Feltovich, Rand J. Spiro, and Richard L. Coulson, "The Nature of Conceptual
      Understanding in Biomedicine: The Deep Structure of Complex Ideas and the Development
      of Misconceptions," Conceptual Knowledge Research Project Technical Report No. 3
      (Springfield, IL: Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, June 1988). To appear in
      The Cognitive Sciences in Medicine, eds. D. Evans and V. Patel (Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press, in press).

131. Donald B. Yarbrough and Ellen D. Gagne, "Metaphor and the Free Recall of Technical
     Text," Discourse Processes 10, no. 1 (Jan-Mar. 1987): 81-91. Also, see A. W. Inhoff, S.
     D. Lima, and P. J. Carroll, "Contextual Effects on Metaphor Comprehension in Reading,"
     Memory and Cognition 12, no. 6 (1984): 558-567.

132. Miles A. Tinker, Legibility of Print, (Ames, IA: The Iowa State University Press, 1963).

133. Society of Typographic Arts, Herman Zapf and His Design Philosophy (Chicago, IL:
     Society of Typographic Arts, 1987).

134. Michael Twyman, "Typography Without Words," Visible Language 15, no. 1(1981): 5-12.

135. Josef Muller- Brockmann, Grid Systems in Graphic Design (New York, NY: Visual
      Communication Books, Hastings House Publishers, 1985).

136. Jeffery K. Cochran, Sheri A. Albrecht, and Yvonne A. Green, "Guidelines for Evaluating
     Graphical Designs: A Framework Based on Human Perception Skills," Technical
     Communication 36 (First Quarter 1989): 25-32.

137. Bill Winn, "The Role of Graphics in Training Documents: Towards an Explanatory Theory
     of How They Communicate," IEEE Transactions in Professional Communication (in press).

138. William S. Cleveland, The Elements of Graphing Data (Monterey, CA: Wadsworth
     Advanced Books and Soft% are, 1985).

139. Mary Hegarty, Patricia Carpenter, and Marcel A. Just, "Diagrams in the Comprehension of
     Scientific Text," in Handbook of Reading Research Vol. II, eds. R. Barr, M. Kamil, P.
     Mosenthal, and P. D. Pearson (New York, NY: Longman, in press).

140. Edward R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information (Cheshire, CN: Graphics
     Press, 1983).

141. J. M. Carroll, P. L. Smith-Kerker, J. R. Ford and S. A. Mazur, The Minimal Manual, IBM
     Research Report of January 21, 1986, Report No. RC 11637 #52295 (Yorktown Heights,
     NY: 1BM Watson Research Center, 1986).

142. Davida Charney and Lynn Reder, "Designing Interactive Tutorials for Computer Users,"
     Human Computer Interaction 2 (1986): 297-317.

143. Davida Charney and Lynn Reder, "Research on Manual Design," Technical Communication
     34, no. 1 (First Quarter 1987): 52-53.

                                                  26    31
144. Gay Vander linden, Thomas G. Cocklin, and Martha McKita, "Testing and Developing
     Minimalist Tutorials: A Case History," in Proceedings of the 1988 International Society of
     Technical Communication Conference (Washington, DC: Society of Technical
     Communication, 1988): RET-196RET-199.
145. John B. Black, J. Scott Bechtold, Marco Mitrani, and John M. Carroll, "On-line Tutorials:
     What Kind of Inference Leads to the Most Effective Learning?" in Proceedings of the 1989
     Computer and Human Interaction (CHI '89) Conference (New York, NY: Association of
     Computing Machinery, 1989): 81-83.

146. Marshall Atlas, "The User Edit: Making Manuals Easier to Use," IEEE Transactions on
     Professic nal Communication PC-24 (1981) 28-29.

147. Sandra J. Bond, "Protocol Aided Revision: A Tool for Making Documents Usable," paper
     presented at the IBM Academic Information Systems University AEP Conference
     (.4.1ex.indria, VA: IBM, 1985). (Available from author at Pittsburgh Software Engineering
     Institute, Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.)

148. Mary Dieli, "Designing Successful Documents: An Investigation of Document Evaluation
     Methods," Doctoral Diss. in Rhetoric (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
     Department of English, 1986).

149. Thomas Duffy, "Readability Formulas: What's the Use?" in Designing Usable Texts, eds.
     Thomas Duffy and Robert Waller (New York, NY: Academic Press, 1985).

150. L. T. Frase, N. H. McDonald and S. A. Keenan, "Intuitions, Algorithms, and a Science of
     Text Design," in Designing Usable Texts, eds. Thomas Duffy and Robert Waller (New
     York, NY: Academic Press, 1985): 97-112.

151. V. Melissa Holland, Psycholinguistic Alternative to Readability Formulas, Document Design
     Project Technical Report No. 12 (Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research, 1981).

152. V. Melissa Holland, "How to Write Procedural Instructions: Assessing Problems and
     Solutions," paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Convention,
     New Orleans, LA, April 5-9, 1988. (Available from author at the U.S. Army Research
     Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, 5001 Eisenhower Ave., Alexandria, VA
     22333.)

153. Carol Mills and Kenneth Dye, "Usability Testing: User Reviews," Technical Communication
     32, no. 4 (Fourth Quarter 1985): 40-44.

154. Lance A. Miller, "Computers for Composition: A Stage Model Approach to Helping,"
     Visible Language XX, no. 2 (1986): 188-218.

155. Karen A. Schriver, Revising Computer Documentation for Comprehension: Ten Lessons in
     Protocol Aided Revision, Communications Design Center Technical Report No. 14
     (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center, 1984). Also,
     see Karen A. Schriver and Brad Mehlenbacher, Predicting Readers' Problems with
     Text, a hypercard version of CDC TR No. 14 created for the Apple Macintosh Computer and
     designed to provide online instruction for document designers in predicting and diagnosing
     usability problems created by poorly written documentation (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie
     Mellon University, Communications Design Center, alpha version 1989).

156. Karen A. Schriver, "Evaluating Text Quality: The Continuum from Text-Focused to
     Reader-Focused Methods," IEEE Transactions in Professional Communication (December,
     1989, in press).

                                                  27      32
  157. Karen A. Schriver, "Plain Language Through Protocol-Aided Revision," in Plain Language:
       Principles and Practice, ed. Erwin R. Steinberg (Detroit, MI; Way _e State University,
       February, 1990, in press). Also see "Writing for Expert or Lay Audiences: Designing Text
       Using Protocol-Aided Revision," under revision for Written Communication.

 158. Gary M. Schumacher and Robert Waller, "Testing Design Alternatives: A Comparison of
      Procedures," in Designing Usable Texts, eds. Thomas Duffy and Robert Waller (New York,
      NY: Academic Press, 1985): 377-403.

 159. Candice Soderston, "The Usability Edit: A New Level," Technical Communication (First
      Quarter 1985): 16-18.

 160. David D. Roberts and Patricia A. Sullivan, "Beyond the Static Audience Construct: Reading
      Protocols in the Technical Writing Class," Journal of Technical Writing and Communication
      14 (1984): 143-153.

 161. US Department of Health, Pretesting in Health Communications: Methods, Examples and
      Resources for Improving Health Messages and Materials, NIH Publication No. 84-1493
      (Bethesda, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Hea'.:11 Service,
      National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, 1984).
 162. R. John Brockman, Writing Better Computer User Documentation: From Paper to Online
      (New York, NY: Wiley-Interscience, 1986). Also, see G. Kearsley Online Help: Design and
      Implementation (Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley Publishing, Co., 1988).

 163. Thomas Duffy and James Palmer, Online Yelp Systems: Design and Evaluation
       (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University, Instructional Systems Technology, in preparation).
       (Available from the fist author at Indiana University, Instructional Systems Technology, 210
      Education Bldg., Bloomington, IN 47405.) Also see, Thomas M. Duffy, Brad
      Mehlenbacher, and Jim Palmer, "The Evaluation of Online Help Systems: A Conceptual
      Model," in The Society of Text: Hypertext, Hypermedia, and the Social Construction of
      Information, ed. Edward Barrett (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989): 362-387; and
      Brad Mehlenbacher, Thomas M. Duffy, and James Palmer, "Finding Information on a Menu:
      Linking Menu Organization to the User's Goals," Human-Computer Interaction (in press).

164. J. G. Hollands and P. M. Merilde, "Menu Organization and User Expertise in Information
      Search Tasks," Human Factors 29 (1987): 577-586.
165. Phil Rub= and Robert Krull, "Application of Research on Document Design to Online
     Displays," Technical Communication 32 (1985): 29-34.
166. Ben Schneiderman, Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer
     Interaction (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1986).

167. Edward Barrett, ed., The Society of Text: Hypertext, Hypermedia, and the Social
     Construction of Information (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989). Also, see Edward Barrett,
     ed., Text, ConText, and Hypertext (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988).

168. Davida Charney, "Comprehending Non-linear Ter. The Role of Discourse Cues and
     Reading Strategies, Proceedings of Hypertext '87, privately published (November 1987):
     109-120. (Available from the author at The Pennsylvania State University, Department of
     English, University Park, PA 16802.)

169. J. Conklin, "Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey," IEEE Computer 20, no. 9 (September
      1987): 17-41.

                                                   28     33
170. Janet H. Walker, "Hypertext and Technical Writers," in Proceedings of the 1989
      International Technical Communication Conference (Washington, DC: Society of Technical
      Communication, 1989): RT-176-RT-179.
171. Patricia Wright and A. Lickorish, "Colour Cues as Location Aids in Lengthy Texts on Screen
     and Paper," Behavior and Information Technology 7 (1988): 11-30.

172. Proceedings of Hypertext 1987 (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina, Department
     of Computer Science, November 1987). Also, see Mark Bernstein, ed., The Hypertext
     Digest, hypertext document for the Apple Macintosh cunputer (1988). (Available from the
     author at Eastgate Systems, Inc., P.O. Box 1307, Cambridge, MA 02238.) Also, see the
     Special Issue on Hypertext in Communications of the Association of Computing Machinery
     (November 1988).

173. A. Chapanis, "Prelude to 2001: Explorations in Human Communication," American
     Psychologist 26 (1971) : 949-961.

174. W. G. Muller, "Usability Research in the Navy," in Reading and Readability Research in the
     Armed Services, ed. T. G. Sticht and D. Welty-Zapf (Alexandria, VA: Human Resources
     Research Crganization, 1976).

175. Simply Stated, no. 63, Feb. 1986, and no. 56, May-June, 1985 (Washington, DC:
     American Institutes for Research).

176. "Hundreds of Coleco's Adams are Returned as Defective: Firm Blames User Manuals,"
     Wall Street Journal, Nov. 30, 1983.

177. Richard E. Young, "Recent Developments in Rhetorical Invention," in Teaching
     Composition: Twelve Bibliographic Essays ed. Gary Tate (Fort Worth, TX: Texas Christian
     UP, 1987): 1-38.

178. George E. Yoos, ed., Newsletter: Rhetoric Society of America 5, no. 1, January 1975 (St.
     Cloud, MN: St. Cloud State College, Department of Philosophy): 15-20.

179. Richard Coe, "Rationale for the independence of Rhetoric Programs," Newsletter: Rhetoric
     Society of America 4, no. 3, May 1974 (St. Cloud, MN: St. Cloud State College,
     Department of Philosophy): 1-3.

180. Richard L. Johannesen, "Comments on Coe's Comments," Newsletter: Rhetoric Society of
     America 5, no. 1, January 1975 (St. Cloud, MN: St. Cloud State College, Department of
     Philosophy): 1.

181. Donald C. Stewart, "What Is an English Major, and What Should It Be?" College
     Composition and Commmnication 40, no. 2 (May 1989): 188-202.

182. Lavid Chapman and Gary Tate, "A Survey of Doctoral Programs in Rhetoric and
     Composition," Rhetoric Review 5 (Spring 1987): 124-186.

183. Carolyn Miller, "A Humanistic Rationale for Technical Writing," College English 40 (Feb.
     1979): 610-617.

184. Carolyn Miller, "Invention in Technical and Scientific Discourse: A Prospective Survey," in
     Research on Technical Communication, eds. Michael G. Moran and Debra Journet
     (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985): 117-162.
  185. Merrill D. Whitburn, "The Ideal Orator and Literary Critic as Technical Communicators: An
       Emerging Revolution in English Departments," in Essays on Classical Rhetoric and Modern
       Discourse eds. Robert J. Connors, Lisa S. Ede, and Andrea A. Lunsford (Carbondale, IL:
       Southern Illinois Press, 1984): 226-247.
  186. Walter B. Weimer, "Beyond Philosophical Reconstruction," Chap
                                                                         8 in Notes on the
       Methodology of Scientific Researci: (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
       72-92.                                                                Associates, 1979):

  187. Walter B. Weimer, "Science as a Rhetorical Transaction: Toward
                                                                      a Nonjustificational
       Conception of Rhetoric," Philosophy and Rhetoric 10 (Winter 1977): 1-29.

 188. Richard Lloyd-Jones and Andrea A. Lunsford, eds., "Report
                                                                of the College Strand," in The
      English Coalition Conference: Democracy Through Language (Urbana,
      25-36.                                                               IL: NCTE, 1989):

 189. Gerald Graff, Professing literature (Chicago, IL: The University
                                                                         of Chicago Press, 1987).
 190. Don Hinson, "Concerns for the Education of Technical Writers
                                                                   in the United Kingdom," in
      Proceedings of the 1989 International Technical Communication Conference
      DC: Society of Techwcal Communication, 1989): ET-69ET-71.                  (Washington,

 191. Claus Noack, "Teaching Technical Communication in West
                                                                 Germany," paper delivered at
      the 1989 International Technical Communication Conference, Chicago, IL (1989).
      (Available from the author at the Siemens Corporation, D ST QM 23,
                                                                         Bereich Datentchnik,
      Postfach 830-951, D - 8000 Munich 83, West Germany.)
 192. Centre for Professional Writing, "Centre for Professional Writing: The
                                                                             Writing Needs of
      Business Are Our Business" (Waterloo, CA: University of Waterloo, Department of English,
      1987).

 193. Koreo Kinosita, "On the Need to Teach Expository and Technical Writing in Japan,"
      unpublished Plenary Address presented to the Conference on Document Design
      Academics and Industrialists (Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon                   fo. Japanese
                                                                     University, Communications
      Design Center, May 1986). Also, see Koreo Kinosita, "Differences Between
      Western Styles of Scientific and Technical Communication,"
                                                                                    Japanese and
                                                                  paper presented at the 2nd
      Eindhoven Symposium on Language for Special Purposes, 1988 (available
                                                                                 from the author
      at Gakushuin University, Faculty of Science, Mejiro, Tokyo, Japan); Izutni Aizu
      and Hiraku Amemyia, "The Cultural Implications of Manual
                                                                 Design," in Proceedings of the
      1985 International Technical Communication Conference (Washington,
                                                                             DC: Society of
      Technical Communication, 1985): WE-33WE-35; John W. Mackin, "The
      Current State of Teaching Technical Communications in Japan," unpublished
     at the 1989 international Technical Communications Conference (available paper presented
                                                                                from the author
     at Fujitsu Limited, Technical Documentation Section, Fukokuseimei Building,
                                                                                     1-1-3,
     Kaizuka, Kawasaki-ku, Kawasaki, Japan); John W. Mackin, "Surmounting the
     Barrier Between English and Japanese Technical Documents,"
                                                                   Technical Communication
     (Fourth Quarter 1989, in press); Akiko Hirayama, Yoko Takamatsu, and Hiroshi
     Takehara, "Starting a Technical Communication Department in
     Case Study," in Proceedings of the 1989 International Technicala Large Japanese Company: A
                                                                      Communication Conference
     (Washington, DC: Society of Technical Communication, 1989): MG-139MG-141;
     Kyoko Matsui, "Document Design from a Japanese Perspective: Improving the              and
     Relationships between Clients and Writers," Technical Communication (Fourth Quarter
     1989, in press).

194. Robert D. Eagleson, "Plain Language in Banking Documents,"
                                                                in Banking Law and Practice
     1986, ed. R. Baxt (Melbourne, Australia: Banking Law Association,
                                                                       1986): 121-142. Also,

                                                  30     35
     see Law Reform Commission of Victoria, Legislation, Legal Rights and Plain English:
     Discussion Paper No. 1 (Melbourne, Australia: Law Reform Commission of Victoria, 1986);
     and Law Reform Commission of Victoria, Plain English and the Law: Report No, 9
     (Melbourne, Australia: Law Reform Commission of Victoria, 1987). (The last two
     reports are available from the Law Reform Commission of Victoria, 7th Floor,
      160 Queen Street, Melbourne Vic. 3000, Melbourne, Australia.) Also, see R. John
     Brockman, "A Technical Communication Society Revives in Australia," Technical
     Communication 36, no. 1 (First Quarter 1989): 43-46.

195. Haggai W. Namai, "Learning and Teaching in Professional Facilities at the University of
     Nairobi, Kenya," in Proceedings of the 1989 International Technical Communication
     Conference (Washington, DC: Society of Technical Communication, 1989): ET-66ET-68.




                                               31
                                                        36
                        NATIONAL ADVISORY PANEL
                       The Center for the Study of Writing


                                       Chair
                                   Fred Hechinger
                            The New York Times Foundation




Alonzo Crim                                      Sibyl Jacobson
Professor of Urban Educational Leadership        Executive Director
Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA            Metropolitan Life Foundation



Sister Regina Noel Dunn                          John Maxwell
Teacher                                          Exeutive Director
Villa Maria Academy, Malvern, PA                 National Council of Teachers of English



Marcia Farr                                      Roy Pea
Associate Professor of English                   Principal
University of Illinois, Chicago, IL              Andrews High School, El Paso, TX



Abraham Glassman                                 Carol Tateishi
Chairman                                         Teacher
Connecticut State Board of Education             Ross Elementary School, Kentfield, CA



Bill Honig                                       Richard C. Wallace, Jr.
California Superintendent                        Pittsburgh Superintendent of Schools
   of Public Instruction                         and Secretary, Board of Education



The Honorable Gary K. Hart
California State Senator




                                            37
