Technical Report No. 46

Plain Language for
Expert or Lay Audiences:
Designing Text Using
Protocol-Aided Revision

Karen A. Schriver

February, 1991


                                             Abstract


        Critics of the "plain language movement" point out that what is "plain" to one audience
may mystify and confuse another. Questions such as "Plain language for whom?" and "How can
we know whether a text is written in plain language?" raise legitimate concerns about the danger
of ignoring that what is "plain" is relative to the particular audience reading and/or using a text.
This paper addresses these questions by illustrating a concrete and empirically-tested procedure
for revising texts to meet the needs of expert or lay audiences. Specifically, this paper details
protocol-aided revision-a procedure which employs readers' responses to texts to guide revision
activity-and demonstrates why actual reader feedback is the most sensible and effective criterion
for deciding whether a text is written in plain language. It provides two case studies of texts that
were revised for comprehensibility using protocol-aided revision, underscoring that plain
language is more than verbal text alone; it includes effective integration of visual and verbal text.
This article also presents a cognitive model of the process of protocol-aided revision. This paper
may interest both proponents and critics of plain language because it argues for a redefinition of
plain language and suggests a method for assessing if plain language goals have been met.




               PLAIN LANGUAGE FOR EXPERT OR LAY AUDIENCES:
               DESIGNING TEXT USING PROTOCOL-AIDED REVISION

                                        Karen A. Schriver
                                    Carnegie Mellon University

INTRODUCTION

        People who argue against the "plain language movement" point out that what is "plain" to
one audience may mystify and confuse another. Questions such as "plain language for whom?"
and "How can we know whether a text is written in plain language?" raise legitimate concerns
about the danger of ignoring that what is "plain" is relative to the particular audience reading or
using a text. Up to this point, plain language proponents have not sufficiently addressed the issue
of defining plain English. This lack of definition has fueled critics of the movement to argue that
plain language is so loosely defined that it can mean anything from the process of simplifying
complex sentence structure to the wholesale rewriting of documents. Critics from the areas of
medicine, law, and government are worried that plain language will be translated as "dummying
down" their documents. They are legitimately concerned that people without subject-matter
expertise will decide what language will be considered technical and that such people may
misinterpret or actually change the meaning of documents with legal or medical implications
(MacNeil/Lehrer Report, 1978).

        While both proponents and critics agree that, in theory, plain language could be very
beneficial, the questions remain, "What is plain language?" and "Will all readers benefit from
plain language?" The purpose of this paper is to suggest that plain language can be defined and
that specific methods exist for insuring a text's clarity for its intended readership. Through cases
studies of the revision process of several texts, this paper provides evidence that plain language
can indeed benefit all audiences, whether expert or lay. Thus, the definition of plain language
will be extended to creating clearly written and usable texts that suit the unique needs and
purposes of both subject-matter novices and subject-matter experts. This paper will show why
collecting reader feedback in response to a text is the most effective test for judging whether it is
plain for the intended audience. Specifically, this paper will detail "protocol-aided revision," a
procedure which uses reader feedback to guide revision of texts for comprehensibility and
usability. In addition, this paper will stress that plain language is more than verbal text alone; it
includes effective integration of text and graphics. Finally, this paper provides a model of the
protocol-aided revision process, illustrating how protocols can help writers modify text to meet
the special needs of particular audiences.

THE PROBLEM IN DEFINING "PLAIN ENGLISH"

        In 1979, Veda Charrow asked proponents of the plain language movement, "What is
plain English, anyway?" Charrow answers this question indirectly, asserting that "although most
of us would probably not agree on what plain English is, we could probably agree on some
aspects of what it is not" (Charrow, 1979, p. 2). Charrow explicates the variety of ways that
advocates have defined plain English, citing that it is not "legalese," or "plain, ordinary peoples'
language," or "texts that are written with short sentences and simple words" (Charrow, p. 3).
Early advocates such as Charrow spent a great deal of time trying to address the needs of at least
four distinct audiences for plain language: (1) consumers, (2) critics, (3) government officials,
and (4) writing and reading researchers. Each audience had a different set of concerns regarding
a definition. Consumers wanted it to mean that they would be able to understand and use the
documents they read and sign. Critics wondered if plain language meant "elimination of all
technical words" and worried about its implications in the marketplace, its ramifications for
creating and revising public documents, and its effect on texts that were intended for lay and/or
expert audiences (MacNeil/Lehrer Report, 1978, pp. 4-5). Government officials wanted to know
what a plain language law would look like and what enforcement would involve. Writing and
reading researchers wanted to know if there were ways to verify whether a document was written
in plain language; they wanted to move plain language beyond the slogan stage and to create a
research agenda involving how people read and understand functional documents such as
textbooks, contracts, procedural texts, informational brochures, forms, leases, consumer product
information, or computer manuals (Felker, 1980; Hartley, 1978).

        At the same time advocates were trying to define plain language, they were also trying to
educate consumers. During the late 1970s, advocates of plain language were trying to inform the
public that confusing and hard-to-understand public documents did not have to be the norm, that
there were alternatives to medicalese, legalese, and bureaucratese. Consequently, most effort in
the late 1970s in Britain and in the United States was devoted toward raising the consciousness
of consumers that they indeed have a right to demand plain language. Early advocates provoked
controversy by arguing that unclear and purposefully vague and jargon-laden language was being
used as a tool to keep the less knowledgeable, less powerful, less wealthy, from knowing what
they were signing.

        When plain language came to the public's attention, there were very few publications
concerning the nature of document design and writing processes. There was also very little
consolidated research on how people read and use public documents. (For a review of recent
literature on document design, see Schriver, 1989b.) Part of the mission of early publications
such as The Information Design Journal, Visible Language, and the American Institutes of
Research newsletter, Fine Print, (now Simply Stated), and Carnegie Mellon University's
Communications Design Newsletter was to inform researchers, educators, and practitioners of
new findings on document design research as well as to provide a forum for raising plain
language issues. However, before writing and document design research had time to clarify the
goals of plain language, thus allowing it to be defined more convincingly, lawyers and
government officials were wrangling over its definition on American television (see, for
example, The MacNeil/Lehrer Report, "Plain English," 1978).

        It is unfortunate that plain English got off to such a confused start. Almost every country
which has advocated plain language has found itself in the position of needing to clarify what it
is and is not. The following characterization of plain language created by Australia's Law
Reform Commission of Victoria (1986) demonstrates the continued need to clarify the nature of
plain English:

       Plain English is a full version of the language, using the patterns of normal, adult
       English. It is not a type of basic English, or baby-talk. While documents that are
       converted to plain English may be described as simplified, they are simplified in
       the sense of being rid of entangled, convoluted language-language that is difficult
       to analyze and understand, language that submerges, confuses and conceals its
       message. They are simplified in this sense, and not in the sense that the language
       has been severely condensed or amputated and the message truncated. Plain
       English is not artificially complicated, but it is clear and effective for its intended
       audience. While it shuns the antiquated and inflated word, which can readily be
       either omitted altogether or replaced with a more useful substitute, it does not
       seek to rid documents of terms which express important distinctions. Nonetheless,
       plain language documents offer non-expert readers some assistance in coping with
       these technical terms. To a far larger extent, plain language is concerned with
       matters of sentence and paragraph structure, with organization and design, where
       so many of the hindrances to clear expression originate. (Law Reform
       Commission of Victoria, 1986, p. 3)

       This characterization makes two important points about the goals of plain language. First,
to meet goals of plain language does not mean condescending to the reader. Second, writers and
designers of plain language documents intend neither to eliminate nor to hide complex ideas or
technical terms in documents. These points are important ones that need to be reinforced and
demonstrated before the goals of plain language will be understood by its critics.
         One drawback of the Victoria Commission's characterization, however, is that it appears
to limit the scope of plain language to a focus on documents written for non-expert readers (that
is, lay audiences or low-literate readers). Yet it is clear that many documents intended for expert
audiences also fail to meet the expert reader's needs. For example, in a recent case before the
United States Circuit Court in Dade County, Florida, a woman sued a medical equipment
company for physical injuries that were caused by the malfunctioning of a device called a
"programmable neurostimulator" (Garner vs. Cordis, 1987). This device is designed to block the
pain associated with damage to the central nervous system by sending mild electronic impulses
to the damaged nerves. When properly implanted, the device relieves pain. However, if
improperly implanted, the device can create extreme pain and cause more damage to the nervous
system. The woman (Garner) sued the company arguing that due to a malfunction of their
equipment, she was left with severe spinal cord damage. The company (Cordis) presented a
counter argument that the problem was caused by the physician who improperly implanted the
device too deeply beneath the skin. Cordis claimed that their manual gave clear procedural
information regarding how deep to implant the device and that the fault was with the physician.

        The doctor's counter argument was that critical information on the depth of implanting
was not clearly written nor was it located in a visually prominent place in the manual. The
physician argued that the documentation did not warn physicians that "if implanted too deeply, it
could misfire . . . possibly damaging the spinal cord" (Garner vs. Cordis, 1987, pp. 40-41). The
question then became one of whether the documentation was written in plain language for the
expert and whether the important information was well designed for the expert. An expert
witness (Duffy) who evaluated the adequacy of the documentation found that indeed the text did
not clearly state the consequences associated with implanting the device too deeply.
Furthermore, the text did not use bold face, highlighting, or graphic features to warn physicians
of the dire consequences associated with implanting the device too deeply (Garner vs. Cordis,
pp. 48-49).

         In other professional work environments such as that of managing a computer center,
poorly designed paper and online computer documentation has been found to cost experienced
system programmers valuable time and energy because of incomplete, inconsistent, and
hard-to-locate information (Norman, 1981; Schriver & Hayes, in preparation). Similarly, the
United States General Accounting Office describes a radar manual in which experienced
technicians had to refer to 165 pages in eight documents and to look in 41 different places in
those documents to repair one malfunction (Duffy, Post, and Smith, 1987; General Accounting
Office, 1979). There is also evidence that expert pilots in the United States Air Force perform
less efficiently with traditional manuals than they do with manuals that give precise, step-by-step
instructions (Hatterick & Price, 1981, p. 77).

         But expert audiences usually need more than accurate and logical procedural information;
they need text that is designed to facilitate high-level problem-solving. The late Judith Resnik,
astronaut of the U.S. Challenger Mission, reports that astronauts found the documentation for
their training to be comprised of plodding procedural instructions that provided little assistance
for the sophisticated problem-solving required of flight engineers under actual conditions
(McKay, Petro, Magin, & Resnik, 1985). She argues that astronauts need to understand more
than just which button to push or even which contingency procedures to follow because they
need to be able to apply their understanding to the unexpected problems of each particular
mission.
        What experts seem to want most are detailed examples of operations or situations they
might find themselves in; thus, experts can use either the examples directly, modify them for the
particular task at hand, or draw implications from them and derive their own solution. McKay,
Petro, Magin, and Resnik (1985) underscore the importance of well-constructed examples in
texts written for experts and the need for instructional text to promote active learning.

        And like the manual written for the surgeon described above, McKay, Petro, Magin, and
Resnik point out that training manuals written for astronauts have both content and document
design problems. They present examples of "Orbital Maneuvering" manuals produced with type
size as small as three points; long sections of text printed in capitalized letters; schematics and
diagrams of complex equipment that are small and hard to read and that are not placed near the
text which describes them. Overall, they assert that training materials written for astronauts
contain a variety of visual and verbal text that is not integrated in any meaningful way.

        When texts are redesigned for the intended audience's particular needs, the changes can
have a dramatic effect on how the audience will respond to the text. Ayoub, Cole, Sakala, and
Smillie (1974) found that system analysts and engineers improved in their performance when the
manuals were redesigned for expert use. Moreover, Robert Eagleson, the Australian
government's Special Advisor on plain language, reports that putting forms and documents into
plain language (many of which are used by experienced clerical and supervisory staff) has saved
business and government thousands and sometimes millions of dollars (Simply Stated, 1986, pp.
1-4).

       The common theme in these examples is that like texts written for lay audiences, texts
aimed at experts are also often both poorly written and poorly designed. Examples such as these
make it clear that a working definition of plain language must include expert as well as lay
audiences. A well written text in plain language, then, is one which enables the intended
audience, whether expert or lay, to comprehend and use the text effectively.

THE IMPORTANCE OF READER FEEDBACK

         Since the 1940s, writers and document designers have been looking for ways to verify the
success of public documents and many techniques have been developed to aid the document
evaluation process. The most widely used techniques, readability formulas such as those of
Flesch (1949) and Gunning (1952), rely on counting the number of words and syllables per
sentence to determine a document's readability. These techniques are by definition text-based,
that is, they focus solely on surface-level text features and not on how readers respond to the
texts (see Schriver, 1989c, for a discussion of this issue). Tests of this sort have been shown to
have severe limitations for guiding the revision of texts that are effective and usable (Duffy &
Waller, 1985). While such tests can provide gross clues suggesting which sentence-level features
may be problematic, their output provides little, if any, information about how the document is
working at the paragraph and whole-text level. In fact, when such text-based tests are used as the
only guide for revision, revisors may actually make the text worse instead of better (Swaney,
Janik, Bond, & Hayes, 1981).

       Successful revision has been shown to depend on the writer's ability to anticipate the
needs of a reader and to identify ways to help clarify whole-text problems from the reader's
perspective (Flower, Hayes, Carey, Schriver, & Stratman, 1986; Hayes, Flower, Schriver,
Stratman, & Carey, 1987; Schriver, 1987, 1989a; Sommers, 1980). To revise a document for a
particular audience requires that writers recognize and predict the diverse goals and reading
strategies that people may bring to the process of understanding and using a functional
document.

       Readers have been found to bring a wide variety of goals, purposes, assumptions, and
reading strategies to their comprehension and use of functional texts. Some of the goals and
purposes readers may bring include reading to:

1.     do a task, e.g., filling out a form for a loan application;

2.     understand an idea, a concept, or definition, e.g., reading to understand one's
       rights in a legal contract;

3.     find information quickly, e.g., trying to find a procedure in a user's manual for
       operating a computer;

4.     assess the relevance of a text, e.g., reading a brochure which describes the
       conditions for a tax rebate;

5.     interpret and use the information for a purpose other than the text's intended
       purpose, e.g., reading a computer manual to solve a problem that is not described
       in the text, but that may be solved by analogous means;

6.     refresh one's memory about a fact, procedure, or idea that is vaguely remembered,
       e.g., reading a reference manual for a telephone answering machine to retrieve a
       fact about remote dialing;

7.     make a decision about choices or alternative ways to consider the same idea, e.g.,
       reading a pamphlet that describes the pros and cons of building a nuclear power
       plant.

        To determine if a document is meeting the goals and purposes of the intended audience,
writers need more feedback than text-based tests can provide. Writers and document designers
have found standard writing advice too simplistic to guide the revision of the complex
documents they create. Writers want more than vague maxims such as "choose a suitable design
and hold to it" and "avoid fancy words" (Strunk & White, 1979, pp. 15 and 76).

        Today's writers and document designers are often faced with a range of decisions, most
of which are not at the sentence-level-decisions such as whether to present the text on paper or
via online; how to organize the text to promote rapid retrieval of information, or how to choose
optimal graphic devices to help clarify the text's structure and meaning. Instead of abstract
"elements of style," writers are looking for answers to concrete questions concerning how well
the text is functioning for the intended audience.

        As audiences become more specialized and more educated in technical areas, they expect
documents that are not designed "for everyone," but rather, are targeted to their particular needs.
In many industrial and corporate document design contexts-computer, electronics, and appliance
industries, for example-writers must tailor their texts to very particular audiences. The ability to
adapt texts for audiences who are novices, intermediates, or experts in a particular subject-matter
is rapidly becoming a requisite skill in industry.

       Writers are finding that the best way to evaluate the success of a functional document is
perhaps the most obvious: observe readers while they try to understand and use the document.
An effective revision procedure that uses the feedback of readers while they are engaged in the
process of comprehending and using a text is protocol-aided revision, a method developed in
1980 by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University's Communications Design Center.

WHAT IS PROTOCOL-AIDED REVISION?

        While protocol analysis as a method for studying cognitive processes has been widely
discussed in the literature (see, for example, Ericsson & Simon, 1984) the use of protocols to
guide reader-based revision of functional documents has not. Protocol-aided revision is a method
for helping writers see problems in text that they might otherwise miss. It involves using readers'
comprehension and performance difficulties as the basis for revision activity. It is a cyclical
activity in which each cycle consists of readers responding to a text and a writer using readers'
responses to guide revision. The next nine sections of this paper are intended to help the reader
understand how to use protocols in revision. These sections will cover the following topics: the
nature of protocols and their functions, designing protocol tasks, selecting participants for a
protocol task, creating instructions, practical issues in collecting protocols, transcribing,
summarizing, and coding protocols, and finally, fixing problems uncovered by participants.

The Nature of Protocols

         A protocol is a record of events, thoughts, or behaviors that occur over a period of time.
The record is usually obtained by using a videotape, an audiotape, or a computer program which
monitors a person's interaction with a machine. Protocol analysis is a method for tracing a
person's thinking or performance on a task. Psychologists, decision-making theorists, writing
researchers, and document designers are among those who have used protocol analysis to study
how people think as they engage in activities such as solving chess problems (Simon &
Gilmartin, 1973); making decisions in supermarkets (Payne & Ragsdale, 1978); planning,
writing, or revising text (Berkenkotter, 1983; Flower et al., 1986; Hayes & Flower, 1980; Hayes
et al., 1987; Schriver, 1987, 1989c; Smagorinsky, 1989); or using computer manuals (Bond,
1985; Schriver, 1984).

        Generally, there are two categories of protocols which have relevance to writers and
document designers: behavior protocols and thinking-aloud protocols. In behavior (or motor)
protocols, the writer/document designer watches participants as they interact with and use texts
such as forms, contracts, procedural instructions, or computer documentation, recording their
actions and behaviors. The primary feature of this type of protocol is that participants do not talk
aloud while performing a task-they simply do the task while either a document designer or a
computer program records what they do. Typically, writers/document designers collecting
behavior protocols are interested in such issues as: where readers look for information (in
indexes, in tables of contents, in glossaries; how quickly people can find information (in
searching for information online); how users make errors and recover from them while operating
machinery; how features such as color, windowing, or display rate influence people's ability to
use computers; or how quickly and accurately people can perform a task while using a set of
instructions (using a manual to assemble a bicycle).
       Behavior protocols include eye movement studies, keystroke logs, and user-edits. Eye
movement studies have been used by document designers to determine the effect of colors,
display rate, and cursor movement in online documentation and interface design. Keystroke logs,
which can be collected automatically during interaction with a computer, provide detailed
information about users' error and error-recovery patterns. User-edits, first described by Atlas
(1981) involve having users try to work with a machine, using only its manual as a guide.

        In thinking-aloud protocols, on the other hand, participants are asked to perform a task
while thinking aloud as they interact with a document and/or with a machine. When people
experience difficulty in comprehending or in using the document, their comments typically
reveal the location and nature of the difficulty. Unlike participants in behavior protocols,
think-aloud participants are asked to verbalize anything that comes to their mind as they are
engaged in the task. Because thinking-aloud protocols are collected while the person is reading.
and is engaged in the process of comprehension, they provide much more explicit and complete
information than do readers' comments collected after reading is finished. Hayes and his
colleagues introduced the use of thinking-aloud protocols to basic research in comprehension and
writing processes (Hayes & Flower, 1980, 1983; Hayes & Simon, 1974; Hayes, Schriver,
Blaustein, & Spilka, 1986; Hayes, Waterman, & Robinson, 1977), as well as to applied research
in writing and document design (Bond, Flower, & Hayes, 1980; Hayes, 1982; Swaney et al.,
1981).

        Typically, the constraints of practical situations require writers/document designers to
choose between these two types of protocols, depending on their goals and purposes in
evaluating a text. Since each type of protocol gives the evaluator a different window on the text,
it is important to clarify one's purpose in evaluating the document before selecting a method.
Behavior protocols are often employed when the purpose of evaluation is to determine how
quickly and accurately people can use a text. Think-alouds are frequently used when the goal is
to assess how people understand, solve problems with, draw inferences about, use, or read texts.

        Think-alouds are not advisable when the evaluator needs precise measures of speed in
completing a task, mainly because verbalizing one's thoughts will increase the participant's total
time. In addition, think-alouds may be a waste of time when the knowledge or strategies
participants will likely employ are tacit, that is, when knowledge or procedures are so
well-known that participants use them unconsciously and therefore do not verbalize about them.
While think-aloud protocols do not give the evaluator a complete picture of the participant's
thinking process as he or she completes a task, they do provide a view which is often much more
detailed and informative than is provided by any other method.

        Behavior protocols, on the other hand, are not the best choice when the goal is to debug a
text for comprehensibility and usability. Behavior protocols, for example, often fall short of
providing the writer with the kind of information most needed to revise. Writers and document
designers interested in where, how, and why readers make errors in using or in understanding a
text will find only the grossest clue for answering these questions with behavior protocols. A
person using a computer, for instance, may make an error in issuing a command-a behavior that
can easily be recorded with a keystroke protocol. The revisor, however, needs to know why the
error occurred. Did the person make the error because of: (1) a slip of the finger, (2) a misreading
of the correct command, (3) a missing instruction, (4) a poorly-worded instruction, (5) a faulty
inference about what the instruction meant, (6) a misunderstanding of an example within the
instruction, or (7) inaccurate, incomplete, or misleading feedback from the system itself?
        The advantage of think-alouds is that participants often say how and why they are having
a difficulty with the text. Therefore, the writer has both locative and diagnostic information that
will help guide revision decisions. Knowing how many minutes it takes for a person to use a text
does not really give writers information about how and where to revise the text.

        Writers and document designers have many alternatives in choosing methods to evaluate
a text. They may want to choose the single most informative method or they may want to choose
the best set of converging measures. More than one kind of feedback on a document will provide
the revisor with more complete and reliable information on which to base revisions aimed at
improving the quality of the text for the intended audience(s). Alternative measures include
reader feedback methods such as behavioral or "think-aloud" protocols, retrospective
questionnaires, scaled surveys, discourse-based interviews, or a critical incident reports. Revisors
may also employ text-focused methods such as the Flesch or Gunning readability scores. The
advantage of the reader feedback methods is that because they elicit the response of an actual
audience, they tend naturally to be more sensitive to differences between expert and lay
audiences than do the text-focused methods.

        An important factor in deciding the kind(s) of reader feedback to use is whether the
method is concurrent, that is, elicits feedback during reading, or retrospective, that is, elicits
feedback after the participant has finished reading the document. The primary difference
between concurrent and retrospective feedback is that concurrent measures capture the real-time
problem-solving behaviors of readers, while retrospective measures rely on the reader's
after-the-fact reporting of events. Concurrent reader feedback tests include both behavior and
think-aloud protocols, such as eye movement protocols, keystroke protocols, user-edits,
thinking-aloud verbal protocols. Retrospective reader feedback tests include questionnaires,
surveys, discourse-based interviews, critical incident techniques, and reader opinion cards.

       While retrospective procedures can provide extremely useful data, researchers agree that
concurrent measures provide the most reliable data. Over the past seven years, many writers,
document designers, teachers, and researchers have asserted that behavior and think-aloud
protocols are the most sensitive ways to evaluate the quality of a functional document (Atlas
1981; Bond, 1985; Bond et al., 1980; Dieli, 1986; Lund, 1985; MacKenzie & Gerdes, 1987;
Mills & Dye, 1985; Roberts & Sullivan, 1984; Schriver, 1984, 1987, 1989c; Schriver et al.,
1986; Soderston, 1985; Swaney et al., 1981; Winbush & McDowell, 1980; Winkler, Ferguson, &
Youngquist, 1985; Witman, 1987).

        Protocol-aided revision is now a widely-used evaluation method in many human factors
and testing labs across the country (Lewis, 1983). Soderston (1985), for example, provides a
detailed account of the usability edit conducted at IBM Kingston's Human Factors Laboratory;
she argues that this procedure consistently reveals gaps and ambiguities in texts that have already
gone through many technical reviews. Similarly, Lund (1985), from the Control Data
Corporation, describes using "the candid camera approach" for evaluating the user interface of a
new interactive graphics application. In addition, protocol-aided revision is now taught in
undergraduate and graduate courses in document design and professional and technical writing at
the college and university level (Roberts & Sullivan, 1984; Schriver, 1984, 1987). Moreover,
protocol-aided revision, which employs think-alouds to isolate problem areas in documents, is an
extremely effective means for revising for comprehensibility.
Designing an Evaluation Using Protocol-Aided Revision

        Before conducting protocol-aided revision, writers/document designers will need to
specify just what is expected from participants; that is, they will need to specify what participants
will read or do. A primary consideration is to select a task (or tasks) which will best evaluate
whether the document's goals for the audience are being met. For example, if the text is a
reference manual, the task should test how successfully people are able to retrieve information
from sections such as the index or the table of contents and then find the information in the main
body of the text.

        In addition to deciding the participants' task, writers/document designers must determine
whether participants will read all of the text or just sections of it. If the text is too lengthy to
conduct a complete evaluation, it is usual to isolate a section (or sections) to be evaluated. In so
doing, it is important to select portions of the document that may be most sensitive to revealing
how the document is functioning for the audience. It is useful to evaluate the least complex
sections of the text as well as the most difficult. Furthermore, if the text has a table of contents or
an index, these sections should be tested. This will allow the writer/document designer to see
how people respond to the varying degrees of difficulty within the document as well as to the
document's access features. It is recommended that the task should take the participant no more
than one hour to complete; otherwise, the test results may be altered by the participant's fatigue.

        In creating a context for the task, many writers/document designers use the "scenario
approach" involving giving participants a concrete goal for doing the task. For example, suppose
the writer of a medical brochure describing the advantages and disadvantages of various surgical
procedures wanted to know if readers clearly understood their options. The scenario provided to
protocol participants might be: "Imagine you are about to make an important decision about
which surgical procedure to choose for your mother. Your goal in reading this brochure is to
determine what decision to make based on the information provided." Usually, providing
participants with a concrete goal or purpose will lead them to take a active role in reading and
understanding the text. When participants have no goal or purpose in reading the text, they
sometimes take a more passive role in their reading and understanding, tending to monitor their
comprehension less often, thus verbalizing very little.

        Selecting participants for the protocol task. To evaluate a document for its intended
audience requires that participants in protocol-aided revision be members of (or at least share a
great deal in common) with the intended audience. Before selecting participants for a protocol
task, create a profile of the intended audience, for example, age, experience level, background,
reading ability, attitudes, knowledge of technology, and so on. In general, it is a good idea to
determine how much the participant knows about the topic as well as the participant's attitudes,
preferences, and biases about the topic. If the audience profile is complex, it may be important to
create a screening survey to insure that participants' backgrounds best match the profile, for
instance, an experienced UNIX user, with five years of programming, who knows at least two
other systems, and who prefers online documentation. For an example of a well-constructed
participant screening survey, see Borenstein's (1985) study of online help systems.

        One of the most frequent questions writers ask about protocol-aided revision is,
"How many participants should I recruit?" While there are no definitive answers, a few
suggestions can be made. First, keep in mind that the goal in recruiting participants is to
gather a variety of responses to the text rather than to ensure statistical reliability. It is
important not to confuse protocol-aided revision with an experiment— its goal is neither
hypothesis testing nor verification. Rather, it is aimed at debugging poorly-written text. Second,
while collecting even one protocol is better than no protocol, one may be highly idiosyncratic
and unrepresentative of the larger intended audience. The important question is, How small can
your participant sample be and still be useful? In practice, document designers at the
Communications Design Center have found that five participants per cycle has proved a useful
number in conducting protocol-aided revision.

        While a single cycle of protocol-aided revision is typically very helpful in comparison to
other revision techniques, it is wise in most cases to use several cycles. A rough rule of thumb is
that the first pass finds about half of the reader's problems, the second pass half of the remaining
problems, and so on. Most documents can be revised to meet the reader's needs in two or three
cycles. For each revision cycle, five new participants should be recruited. One should avoid
asking the same person to provide a protocol on a document (or task) more than once.

         Creating instructions. In conducting protocol-aided revision, it is essential to create
well-written instructions. Poor instructions will increase the likelihood that participants will
misunderstand or freely interpret the task. The instructions you create will vary depending on the
type of protocol best suited to helping you find the difficulties in the document. Either of two
types of thinking-aloud protocols are generally useful in most document evaluation contexts:
reading protocols or user protocols. A reading protocol differs from the latter in that the
participant uses only the text in completing the task, for example, reading an informational
brochure or an insurance policy. In user protocols, participants interact with machine, device, or
piece of equipment, for instance, a computer, as they perform the task. This difference becomes
important because a participant providing a user protocol will need to look at the document and
the equipment alternatively. To know what the participant is focusing on, it will be important to
provide instructions that mention talking aloud while using either the text or the machine as they
are completing the task. In addition, unless told, participants may think the task is to test their
ability to use the equipment rather than to test the manual. Similarly, reading protocol
participants may think the task is to test their reading ability or their knowledge and opinions of
the subject matter. Below are typical sets of instructions for reading and user protocols.

Typical instructions for a reading protocol

       Thank you for agreeing to participate in providing a think-aloud reading protocol.
       The goal of this task is to help writers revise the document according to what
       readers like you need. The reading protocol you provide will help writers see how
       well or how poorly the text works for a reader. We are not testing how well you
       read. We are not testing your knowledge or opinions of the subject matter. Rather,
       we are testing how the text might be improved for a reader with background
       knowledge and experience such as you have. Please read the text aloud and say
       anything that comes to your mind as you are reading. Do not worry about what
       you say, but do keep talking. You do not have to describe how to fix the text
       problems you may see. Just respond to the text, noting when you do not
       understand or when the text creates confusion.

       Please remember to speak loud enough so that your voice will be recorded. If you
       fall silent, I will ask you to "please say whatever you are thinking right now."
       Thank you.
Typical instructions for a user protocol

       Thank you for agreeing to participate in providing a think-aloud user protocol.
       The goal of this task is to help writers revise the document according to what
       readers need when their goal is to use a document to help them to complete a task.
       The user protocol you provide will help writers see how well or how poorly the
       text functions for a reader while engaged in performing the task. We are not
       evaluating your reading ability or your skill in performing the task. Rather, we are
       testing how the text might be improved for someone with background knowledge
       and experience such as you have. In a few minutes, I will explain the task. In
       providing a user protocol, simply do the task, using the document whenever and
       in whatever way you see fit in completing the task. As you are engaged in
       performing the task, please say anything that comes to your mind as you are
       reading or doing the task itself. Do not worry about what you say, but do keep
       talking. When you refer to the text, please read the text you are looking at aloud.
       Do not worry about describing why you are completing the task in a certain way;
       just complete the task as best you can, noting when the text is not helping.

       Because I am interested in how you use information from the text, I will not be
       able to answer any questions during your reading. Please remember to speak loud
       enough so that your voice will be recorded. If you fall silent, I will ask you to
       "please say whatever you are thinking right now." Thank you.

Preparing to Collect a Protocol: Some Practical Issues

       To collect a protocol, you will need the following:

1.     A set of clearly-written instructions that can be given to each participant.
       Writers/document designers should note that the instructions can make or break
       your protocol testing. Be certain to pilot test your instructions for clarity with at
       least two people before conducting a formal protocol. The important question is,
       Do participants interpret the task as I planned them to?

2.     Recording equipment (audio, video, or computer-based). This can be as humble as
       a typical cassette tape recorder to as lavish as equipment found in sophisticated
       testing labs-such recording equipment might include several video cameras; an
       eye-tracking camera; audio, dubbing, mixing equipment; a time-stamping program;
       as well as keystroke-tracking programs.

3.     A place to conduct the protocol. Depending on your goals, you will want to test the
       document in either its actual environment (on the plant floor or in a busy office) or
       under quiet, laboratory-like conditions.

4.     The equipment described in the text if collecting a user protocol. That is, any other
       equipment needed to conduct the protocol, depending on the document you are
       testing (for instance, if the document is a set of instructions for using a cuisinart,
       you will need a cuisinart).

5.     Two copies of the document to be evaluated (one for you and one for the
       participant).

6.     Tapes (either audio or video). Be certain you have a backup. Test the tape(s)
       before collecting the protocol to be sure it is working.

7.     A place to observe. The person collecting the protocol should have a place to
       observe, preferably a place that will not make the participant feel uncomfortable.
       Many evaluators prefer to sit behind a two-way mirror. If it is necessary to sit next
       to the participant, the chair should be positioned in a way so that the evaluator can
       look at the screen or document the participant is reading.

        In addition, you may want to devise a preliminary coding scheme. Coding of protocols,
discussed below, proceeds much more efficiently when the evaluator has at least some idea of
the kinds of difficulties the document may produce. Before collecting the protocol, it is important
to have already conducted a technical and stylistic review. Such reviews allow the evaluator to
begin protocol-aided revision with the best draft possible, that is, one that has been checked for
technical accuracy and style. In addition, these reviews often become good sources of ideas for a
preliminary coding scheme, for example, errors caused by descriptions, errors caused by
procedures, errors caused by poor formatting, or errors caused by missing information. Bring
colored pens to mark the text for various problem types. And when possible, make a tally sheet
for summarizing the various problem types. This will make evaluating your results go very
quickly, but make certain you allow for the creation of new categories after seeing what
participants actually do.

Collecting a Protocol

       Before collecting a protocol, you will need to consider the practical issues mentioned
above. In addition to providing participants with a well-written set of instructions, it is wise to
play an audio or video demonstration tape of someone giving a protocol. The demonstration tape
should be about two minutes in length and it should illustrate a range of positive and negative
comments about the text signs of approval, questions, confusions, predictions, elaborations, or
any reading behavior. The goal is to provide participants with an example that shows them not
"what to do or what you expect" but the range of ways people respond to texts. The aim is to
make participants feel comfortable in responding with whatever comes to their mind as they are
engaged in the task. The instructions you create along with a sample tape will typically be
enough to make most participants feel at ease about talking aloud as they read and/or perform a
task.

         As you are collecting the protocol, try to catalog all you see, including nonverbal
behavior. Follow along as the participant reads the text so you can mark any section that is
unclear or confusing. Once a protocol is in progress, it is best if the evaluator does not intervene.
If participants have questions, allow them time to figure out the answer on their own. Resist
intervening unless the participant becomes frustrated and wants to stop the protocol. After the
participant has completed the task, answer questions, thank him or her, and explain the project in
more detail.

       Transcribing and summarizing protocols. In transcribing protocols for analysis, Bond
(1985) recommends the following procedure:
       Depending on your needs, you may or may not wish to have your protocols
       transcribed. For example, if you videotape the sessions, that may be sufficient.
       But if you tape record the sessions, a transcription on hard copy may allow you to
       more easily detect problems than just listening to the playback alone. By all
       means, though, if you do transcribe you protocols, you should use the hard copy
       transcript together with the tape, because the hard copy transcript cannot capture
       certain things like inflection that the tape can reveal . . . Protocols are typed as
       is-everything on the tape is transcribed-every word, including curse words, and
       every sound (Bond, p. 330).

        A less exhaustive way to summarize think-aloud protocols is to listen to the audio tape or
to watch the video tape, transcribing only selected portions (comments, questions, errors) and
marking the original text for the location of the occurrence. When the writer/document designer
is under time pressure to complete the evaluation, this abbreviated sort of transcription may be an
optimal alternative. This procedure is also appropriate when the objectives for the evaluation are
quite narrow. For example, if the objective involves simply determining how participants
understand the examples in a text, the transcription could be limited to those comments that
occur before and after the text's examples. The output of such a transcription is an itemized list
which is then ready for coding.

        Diagnosing and coding problems that participants experience. While collecting and
summarizing protocols is a relatively straightforward process, interpreting their results, and using
the feedback for revision requires sensitivity and practice on the part of the writer. Once the
protocol has been transcribed or summarized, it should be coded. In "How to Code a
Think-Aloud Protocol for Functional Documents," Johnson and Schriver (1986) suggest that
coding protocols with a goal to revise the document involves classifying how participants
respond to discernible text features such as format, style, layout, graphics, or to various
information types such as procedures, examples, definitions, analogies, cautions, conditionals,
etc. This paper includes sections on "how to code user protocols," "a coding scheme for user
protocols" and "summarizing and consolidating results."

         The ability to diagnose and code the problems that surface in think-aloud protocols is a
skill that develops with practice in evaluating many protocols. Many beginning writers and
document designers have difficulties knowing how to interpret the feedback participants provide.
Some types of reader feedback signal obvious problems, for example, when readers say "What
does this word mean?" Writers can easily diagnose such a problem as a "missing definition."
Other times, however, participants will not overtly "detect" a problem at all. Instead, they may
think that their reading of the text is correct while they are in the process of completely
misunderstanding it. In such cases, the writer will need to have the entire protocol transcribed.
The complete transcription is needed in order to get precise information about where
comprehension went astray.

        In general, it is best if the person who codes the protocols is not the writer of the original
text. Some writers are threatened by reader feedback or are unwilling to accept the comments
participants make as signals of actual problems with their text. They may tend to attribute the
difficulty to the participant rather than to the text. Other writers, however, enjoy watching
participants interact with their text; they find readers' problems interesting and want to learn
more about how their texts can mislead readers.
        Fixing problems the text creates for participants. The last and most important stage in
protocol-aided revision is fixing the problems created by the text. When the text causes few
problems, writers can usually solve its problems by making deletions and minor additions. But
when readers are confused by many aspects of the text, major revisions and rewriting is often
necessary. It is important for writers to try to determine the locus of the problems. In this way,
they will have better information about what solution strategies to employ. As mentioned above,
sometimes readers will misunderstand an entire text, but the misunderstanding may arise out of
one fundamental misconception that occurs early in the text. Other times, the problems will be
distributed throughout the text and the reader's difficulties will escalate with almost every new
idea.

        Once the protocol has been coded, writers will have a better sense of which problems are
most severe and/or frequent. Since most revision is done while under time pressure to finish,
writers should attend to the most severe problems and should decide which problems, if any, will
be left unsolved. The goal, of course, is to find solutions to as many problems as time permits.

       Choosing optimal revision strategies is also a skill that develops with extensive practice.
While there are no clear-cut strategies that work in every revision situation, a few key questions
should initiate any revision activity:

1.     What problems are created by the organization, structure, or layout of the text?
       Answering this question will help focus the writer's attention on the text's
       macrostructure. Research in text design shows that global features such as
       structure and levels of subordination, for example, headings and subheadings, have
       the most impact on the memorability of a text (Britton, 1986). Similarly, research
       in writing underscores that skilled revisors attend to the text's global features early
       in their process, and that solving high-level problems first often has the effect of
       eliminating lower-level problems at the same time (Flower et al., 1986; Hayes et
       al., 1987; Schriver, 1989a).

2.     What alternative verbal or visual solutions are available? Sometimes, as is
       demonstrated in the case studies, a visual solution can help to solve most of the
       text's problems. For functional documents, visual solutions usually take one of
       two shapes. One way to create a visual solution lies in changing the typography,
       section headings, margins, rules, or layout. Another more obvious means of
       creating a visual solution is to supplement or substitute the text with pictures,
       diagrams, tables, charts, or other graphic devices.

         The goal in asking these questions is to solve the text's most severe problems in the
shortest amount of time. Research shows that writers who revise by adopting a sentence-level
perspective of the text typically fail to make revisions that increase the effectiveness of the whole
text. A sentence-level perspective is one in which revisors attack text problems linearly. They
begin by reading the first sentence of the text and by asking "Is there anything wrong with this
sentence?" If they find a problem, they fix it and proceed to the next sentence. The drawback of
this strategy is that it blinds revisors to how the whole text is functioning and focuses their
attention to word and sentence-level errors (Schriver, 1989a). While it is essential to fix local
errors, it is more important and more efficient to adopt a whole-text perspective. In this way, the
most pervasive problems will be dealt with first, thus allowing the solution of sentence-level
problems without the possibility of wasting time fixing problems locally and then determining
that the whole text needs to be rewritten.

PROTOCOL-AIDED REVISION IN PRACTICE: CASE STUDIES OF THE PROCESS

       To help writers and document designers see how protocols can be used in revision, the
following two case studies illustrate the process of protocol-aided revision.

Case Study 1

        The first case study, "The DUC System" (Figures 1-3) comes from the beginning of a
tutorial section of a computer manual on the topic of computer-aided design. The tutorial is
aimed at -graphic designers who are experienced in design using pen and paper but who have no
familiarity with design using a computer. Its goal is to teach new users the fundamentals of
computer-aided design. The manual was written to accompany a new Design Using Computers
(DUC) system, one of the early computer-aided design (CAD) systems. In 1983, this particular
tutorial was being used by a CAD lab within the design department at Carnegie Mellon
University to teach undergraduate graphic designers the basics of CAD systems. The director of
the CAD lab asked the document design team at the Communications Design Center to revise the
text because he felt the text took students too long to "get started" and that they were making
errors in using the equipment. To determine the nature of the text's problems for students,
document designers chose to collect user protocols to evaluate the manner in which the tutorial
was being read and used. Participants who volunteered to provide user protocols were senior
undergraduate design majors who had no prior experience in using CAD equipment.

       Case Study 1 illustrates how protocols can help writers and document designers substitute
or supplement their verbal text with visual text. It is divided into three parts:

1.     the original text, "The DUC System" (Figure 1);

2.     a sample user protocol from one of the inexperienced "DUC" users (Figure 2);

3.     a protocol-aided revision based on the inexperienced user's difficulties with the text
       (Figure 3).
                                         The DUC System

The Display Station

Each display station consists of a terminal with a display screen, a typewriter keyboard, a light
pen, and a function keyboard.

The Display Screen

Message Area-provides feedback on the current status, e.g., function currently in use, scale of
drawing, warning of invalid operation, etc.
Menu Area-provides options which you can choose with the light pen.,

The Light Pen

The light pen is a device which serves two functions. You will learn how to draw points to lines
to more complex objects such as circles and ellipses.

Selecting (Sel)

Selecting an item on the menu area or an element in the drawing area. Hold the pen
perpendicular to the screen with the point touching the desired item and then push the pen point
into the screen until the pen clicks. The terminal prompts you to select by typing Sel in the
message area of the display screen.

Indicating (Ind or Tc)

Indicating an item on the drawing area of the screen. Hold the pen perpendicular to the screen at
approximately the desired place and then hit the Indicate function key. The terminal will prompt
you to indicate by typing IND or TC in the message area of the display screen.

Both of these functions will be covered in the first exercise.

Throughout the manual, we will designate instructions as follows:

•      "Select" always applies to pushing the light pen into the screen until the pen clicks.

•      "Indicate" always applies to touching the light pen to the screen at the specified place and
       hitting the Indicate function.

Figure 1. The original text of "The DUC System."
                                          The DUC System

Well, if I wasn't sitting in front of this terminal. I'd never guess this stuff is about a computer
aided design system.*

The Display Station. Each display station consists of a terminal with a display screen, a
typewriter keyboard, a light pen, and a function keyboard. O.k., so I'm looking at this equipment
and trying to tell which is which I've never used a function box or alight pen before I want to try
out this light pen it looks fun to use. The only thing is that I'm left-handed and I don't know how
to position my hand with all this new stuff.

The Display Screen. Well. I'll assume this means the terminal screen. Message Area-provides
feedback on the current status, e.g., function currently in use, scale of drawing, warning of
invalid operation, etc. I really don't know what I should be looking at here. What part is the
display screen. I haven't tried anything yet so I don't know why they're telling me this detail now
I don't yet understand current status or invalid operations either. Menu Area-provides options
which you can choose with the light pen. Alright. but where exactly is the menu area?

The Light Pen. What is the purpose of the light pen? The light pen is a device which serves two
functions. You will learn how to draw points to lines to more complex objects such as circles and
ellipses. Huh? O.k.. I'm trying to learn the function of this equipment all at once because I'm
eager to create my own drawings. I guess for this session I'll have to be satisfied with the basics
From this introduction. I expect that I'll be moving from drawing points to lines to more complex
elements like circles and ellipses Ok I'm ready. I wonder which functions they are referring
to-drawing lines and circles or selecting and indicating?

Selecting (Sel). Selecting an item on the menu area or an element in the drawing area. Hold the
pen perpendicular to the screen with the point touching the desired item and then push the pen
point into the screen until the pen clicks. I know it says what to do. but I'm having difficulty
knowing exactly how to hold this thing. How do you make it perpendicular? I don't know how
hard to press and I'm afraid of damaging the screen. The terminal prompts you to select by
typing Sel in the message area of the display screen. I wonder if it always prompts you?

Indicating (Ind or Tc). Indicating an item on the drawing area of the screen. Hold the pen
perpendicular to the screen at approximately the desired place and then hit the Indicate function
key. Where is the indicate function key located? How can I do both indicating and hitting
function keys simultaneously? The terminal will prompt you to indicate by typing IND or TC in
the message area of the display screen. What does TC stand for? Where is the message area of
the screen? Couldn't they give me a better idea of how to hold the light pen with a drawing
instead of words?
Both of these functions will be covered in the first exercise. What is the essential difference
between selecting and indicating? I'm not getting this from this description. Whey are they
telling me these commands without a context?

Throughout the manual, we will designate instructions as follows. Is there a reason to tell me the
instructions without telling me when and where I will use them?
"Select" always applies to pushing the light pen into the screen until the pen clicks. Is this really
a two-step action? First you select and then you indicate? Or are there times when I simply
indicate?

"Indicate" always applies to touching the light pen to the screen at the specified place and hitting
the Indicate function. Sounds fairly clear. but I still don't know in what contexts I'd choose these.
It seems odd to put them here


* Underlining indicates comments made by the user.
Figure 2. A sample user protocol collected from an inexperienced user of "The DUC System."


         This case study appears as one of ten lessons in revising computer documentation for
comprehension using protocol-aided revision (Schriver, 1984). Figure 2, the user's protocol,
shows the variety of problems the design student had with the text. The problems he experienced
while trying to use the tutorial allowed a document designer to diagnose problems of several
types. First, problems that took the shape of "what" questions, signaling a call for definitions and
purpose statements. For example, "What is the purpose of the light pen? What is the difference
between selecting and indicating? What does TC stand for?" Second, problems that took the
shape of "how" questions, signaling the need for better procedural information. For example,
"How do I hold the light pen? Do I simultaneously hit both indicating and function keys?
Couldn't they give me a better idea of how to hold the light pen with a drawing instead of words?
Is this really a two-step action, first you select and then you indicate?" Third, problems that took
the shape of "where" questions, signaling the need to clarify the location of various areas of the
screen as well as where the user should look in order to get feedback and/or confirm that his
actions were accurate. For example, "Where should I be looking to get the point of this
information? Will the terminal always prompt me for these commands? Where exactly is the
message versus the menu area? Where is the indicate function key located?" Fourth, problems
that took the shape of "why" questions, signaling a call to provide more contextual information
about the user's goals in invoking particular commands. For example, "Why are they telling me
these commands without a context? Is there a reason to tell me the instructions without telling
me when and where I will use them?"

        In deciding how to the revise the tutorial, the document designer, Carol Janik, felt that the
user's problems were too numerous and too severe to warrant solving the text's problems by
making minor sentence-level repairs. She concluded that the user's comments suggested that the
primary difficulty with the text was that it relied exclusively on a verbal presentation when a
graphic presentation was needed. Thus, she tried to solve the user's questions with one major
strategy, that is, changing the text from a verbal to visual presentation.
         Janik rewrote the text (shown in Figure 3), starting by creating a diagram designed to
answer the user's question about the equipment and "how to hold the light pen." The revision
eliminates most of the reader's problems by including a drawing of how to position the light pen
in relation to the display screen. The revised information on the light pen specifies its basic
functions and then previews that readers will learn to use the pen later in the first exercise. Since
users need to know information about other system functions and procedures, such as logging on
and using the function keyboard, before they can actually begin to draw, the revisor separated the
information accordingly. The revisor also adopted graphic conventions for the meanings of
"selecting" and "indicating" conventions that were used throughout the manual.

        Janik's primary goal during revision was to make the text's organization more transparent.
To do so, she reorganized the text, changed the page layout, and divided the information into
manageable chunks for the reader. She also aimed to provide the reader with a better sense of the
consequences of specific actions. The revision tells the reader specifically that selecting relates to
points, lines, or circles while indicating is used for elements, areas, or directions on the screen.

Case Study 2

The original text, "The Art of Bird Watching," (Figure 4) is part of a brochure that was
distributed to visitors at a nature conservancy in northeastern Pennsylvania. From the
conservancy's point of view, the aim of the brochure is to provide useful information to both
newcomers and experienced bird watchers. People who work at the conservancy are enthusiastic
about helping visitors, whether inexperienced or experienced in bird watching, to get the most
out of their visit and make them feel part of a growing community of people who love birds. The
manager of the conservancy believed that it was important that everyone who visited get a good
impression and want to come back, but he was uncertain about how well the brochure was
meeting the needs of the various visitors.


                                    The Art of Bird Watching

        There are over 800 species of birds representing over 60 families of birds in North
America. Bird Watching or birding is becoming very popular in North America. Birding is an
art. To become a birder involves developing your own techniques for identifying species of
birds. When you go birding, quick and reliable identification of birds species is essential. To
identify birds, compare the form of a typical bird in a particular group to birds with similar
silhouettes. At first glance, note the invariable features: range, shape, behavior, and voice.
Take a journal and make notes that will help you develop your own system for recalling the
important species' characteristics. Try to determine a bird's particular features and attributes
before you look at a field guide for the answer. In time, you will be able to identify birds by their
features and attributes with only a glimpse. The better you get a recognizing patterns related to
flight, walking, feeding, courtship, nest-building, and care for the young, the more skilled you
will become at identifying species of birds. Spend time studying books and looking at birds in
the field. As you become more experienced, you will find the birding technique that works best
for you.

Figure 4. The original text of "The Art of Bird Watching."
        To determine the effectiveness of the brochure for both audiences, protocol-aided
revision was employed. Reading protocols were collected from two members of the intended
audience of the brochure, an inexperienced bird watcher (Figure 5) and an experienced "birder"
(see Figure 7). The inexperienced bird watcher was a twenty-year-old man from Philadelphia
whose friends had invited him to the nature conservancy. He was somewhat skeptical about the
idea of going bird watching. He said that he enjoyed getting out of the city and said he might
learn something new. The expert bird watcher was a thirty-four-year-old woman from Lancaster,
Pennsylvania who had been a member of the Audubon Society for ten years. She was a birding
enthusiast and had traveled across the U.S. and Canada on "birding" camping trips. Figures 5 and
7 are excerpts from their protocols. The passage being read (Figure 4) comes from the beginning
of the brochure.


                                    The Art of Bird Watching

        There are over 800 species of birds representing over 60 families of birds in North
America. That's a lot. I had no idea there were so many. Bird Watching or birding That's a funny
word . . . birding . . . are they serious? is becoming very popular in North America. Birding is an
art. An art of what-just watching birds? To become a birder Oh no, a birder? I'm not really into
being that . . . sounds a little kinky to me, involves developing your own techniques for
identifying species of birds. Like what? When you go birding, When I go birding, hmm . . . this
is strange . . . quick and reliable identification of birds species is essential. I thought you just
looked at the birds. I didn't know you had to figure out species. Sounds hard. Maybe I'll just have
my friends show me. To identify birds, compare the form of a typical bird in a particular group to
birds with similar silhouettes. Well. that would be nice, but how do I know what's typical? What
do they mean by silhouettes-heads or beaks? I can't really picture this too good I could probably
recognize pigeons robins and maybe bluejays. Oh. and I've seen a lot of seagulls at the Jersey
shore At first glance, note the invariable features: Say what? This is getting beyond me ya know,
range, Range is that the length between the beak and the tail? I think I read that somewheres.
shape, behavior, and voice. Voice. I guess bird song. That part sounds easy. Take a journal
Where? and make notes that will help you develop your own system for recalling the important
species' characteristics. They've gotta be kidding taking notes Are you supposed to be Joe-
Thoreau? This is too much for a boy from south Philly Try to determine a bird's particular
features and attributes What's the difference between features and attributes ? before you look at
a field guide What field guide?, for the answer. In time, you will be able to identify birds by their
features and attributes with only a glimpse. Sure I will. The better you get a recognizing patterns
related to flight, walking, feeding, courtship, nest-building, and care for the young, the more
skilled you will become at identifying species of birds. I wouldn't know what patterns to look
for. Spend time studying books Like what? Are they trying to sell me something here? and
looking at birds in the field. As you become more experienced, you will find the birding
technique that works best for you. And if you're lucky, they'll put you on one of those public TV
on one of those nature shows. Sounds like it could be fun. I think.

Figure 5. A sample reading protocol collected from an inexperienced bird watcher.
        From the writer's perspective, the most interesting aspect of these protocols is that the
two readers bring entirely different topic knowledge and expectations to bear in understanding
the brochure. The first conclusion the revisor drew from the protocols was that the text was too
difficult and vague for the inexperienced bird watcher and too elementary for the expert. The
revisor decided that it would be very difficult to satisfy the diverse needs of both audiences in
one brochure and requested permission from the director of the conservancy to create two
brochures.

         The reading protocol of the inexperienced bird watcher shows that he misunderstood
what is involved in bird watching, thinking that it is just looking at birds. The protocol shows
that he lacks knowledge about the meanings of "silhouette" and "range." He oversimplifies the
complexity involved with identifying bird songs and dismisses the idea that taking notes might
be useful. His protocol also reveals that he does not understand the difference between features
and attributes. In addition, he misinterprets the conservancy's motive in suggesting that he look
at a field guide, characterizing the suggestion as a sales pitch. Another major problem the
protocol illustrates is that the reader was unable to act on the advice "to compare the form of a
typical bird in a particular group to birds with similar silhouettes" because he did not know what
a silhouette was. The inexperienced reader, then, missed the main point of the brochure.

        In response to the reader's difficulties, the revisor chose to supplement the text with
examples of typical silhouettes of common bird families (see Figure 6). The revisor decided that
the original text included too many references to unexplained bird features such as range, shape,
behavior, and voice, and that focusing on one relatively simple feature such as shape would be
more informative to a beginner. The revisor felt that more simple descriptive and procedural
advice was needed on how to begin recognizing the general shape of families. In contrast to the
original text, the revised text recommends that the inexperienced bird watcher take a "staged
approach" to becoming more experienced.

        In the rewrite, the writer tried to explain more clearly why a journal and a field guide are
useful. The revision also mentions a particular field guide. Moreover, in concluding the new
version, the writer focuses on getting newcomers excited about birding rather than on developing
their own unique techniques.

        In contrast, the experienced birder's protocol (Figure 7) shows that the information in the
original brochure is insufficient and in some places, misleading. The experienced birder finds
incomplete information concerning birding as an art, methods for identifying birds, field marks
and their use in identifying birds, kinds of books that provide information on birds, binding in
various parts of the country, and ways to identify similar species of birds. In addition, she feels
the brochure makes birding appear much simpler than it is. Her protocol reveals that she finds
the information on how to "note the invariable features" to be misleading. The experienced
birder's final comment raises the issue that "distinguishing among similar species" is perhaps the
central skill in binding-a point the original brochure fails to make in a clear way.

        To solve the problems in the text detected by the expert, the writer decided to focus the
revision on ways to develop expert binding skills (see Figure 8). In so doing, the writer (who was
not an expert bird watcher) consulted the director of the conservancy and the Audubon Society's
Master Guide to Birding (Farrand, 1983). The revisor chose "posture in hawks" as a means to
demonstrate how a feature such as posture can be used to distinguish among species. The writer
purposefully chose an example which could be illustrated, thus adding visual support to the point
about using features to discriminate among species. In addition, the revisor included details that
are missing in the original details that the expert seemed to expect, such as why birding is
becoming sophisticated; why learning field marks is a fundamental skill; how behavior clues
vary from obvious to subtle; and why birding in various terrains, ranges, and seasons is a way to
sharpen skill. Overall, the revision assumes that the reader is an experienced bird watcher who
would like to become an expert.

         This case study is intended to illustrate how experienced and inexperienced audiences
may require texts that contain functionally different kinds of information. In the revision for the
inexperienced birder, the silhouettes are provided to help newcomers understand the need to gain
skills in recognizing shapes of birds. In the revision for an experienced birder, the drawings of
the hawks are intended to illustrate the importance of using features to distinguish similar
species. Moreover, this case study shows how protocols can help writers select revisions that are
tailored to the reader's particular topic knowledge and skill level.
                                    The Art of Bird Watching

        There are over 800 species of birds representing over 60 families of birds in North
America. That's a recent classification scheme, people actually believed there were many more
than that in the 60s. At that time, many species were poorly understood and sometimes males and
females of the same family were considered different species. Bird Watching or birding is
becoming very popular in North America. It's been very popular in the U.S. for at least forty
years. Birding is an art. Of course it's an art, but it needs to say why. Because birding is very
sophisticated these days. Birders use all kinds of ways to identify species Birding was originally
associated with the sport of killing birds. To become a birder involves developing your own
techniques for identifying species of birds. When you go birding, This is oddly phrased. it's not
like going skiing. quick and reliable identification of birds species is essential. Obviously.
To identify birds, compare the form of a typical bird in a particular group to birds with similar
silhouettes. This must be for a beginner, it's a much more come process than that. At first glance,
note the invariable features: range, shape, behavior, and voice. That's sensible advice although
one does not note the range by looking at a bird. It shouldn't say 'at first glance' either they make
it sound so easy just take a quick look and note what you see this is misleading. Take a journal
and make notes that will help you develop your own system for recalling the important species'
characteristics. Try to determine a bird's particular features and attributes before you look at a
field guide for the answer. The field guide doesn't always match what you see. but that's a good
idea for beginners. I agree it's important to develop you own system and stile of birding But
birders should also use the well known field marks that anyone can learn. In time, you will be
able to identify birds by their features and attributes with only a glimpse. The better you get a
recognizing patterns related to flight, walking, feeding, courtship, nest-building, and care for the
young, the more skilled you will become at identifying species of birds. Okay. Spend time
studying books and looking at birds in the field. It doesn't say what kind of books What about
magazines? What about birding in different parts of the country? That's what I like. As you
become more experienced, you will find the birding technique that works best for you. This
brochure is not that useful for rye, I find it somewhat misleading and too general It would be nice
to discuss ways to identify similar species of birds hat'. what birding is all about But
maybe I'm asking too much for a brochure.

Figure 7. A sample reading protocol collected from an experienced bird watcher.
                                       The Art of Birding

        It is not surprising with over 800 species of birds representing over 60 families in North
America to find that birding has become very popular in the United States. Birding, the art of
using color, pattern, shape, size, voice, habitat, and behavior to identify species has become
increasingly sophisticated. Birders are continually finding new ways to distinguish similar
species and to identify new species. To become an expert birder will require that you master the
fundamental skill of identifying field marks quickly and reliably. Visiting museums and reading
books are excellent ways to study field marks before attempting to do so while observing birds in
motion or in flight.

        To identify birds in the field will demand that you use all clues you know about a species'
primary characteristics and features, e.g., size, shape, color, pattern, voice, habitat, and range.
You will need to consider a number of attributes that together give a species a distinctive
personality. Skilled birders usually attend to the species invariable characteristics such as shape,
voice, behavior, and range.

        At first, you will need to spend considerable time studying the variety of birds of the
same species. Next, you will need to study the differences between birds that appear to be
similar. For example, even among the closely related species, there may be differences in
posture: Yellow-crowned Night-herons often stand in a more upright posture than do
Black-crowned Night-herons, and Rough-legged Hawks often perch in a more horizontal posture
than do Red-tailed Hawks (see the drawings below).




        Expert birders also watch for behavioral patterns of flight, walking, feeding, courtship,
nest-building, and care of the young. Some behavior clues are obvious, like the big, splashy
dives of Northern Gannets and Ospreys, or the mothlike flight of a Common Poorwill. Others are
more subtle, such as the flight mannerisms of kittiwakes or the wing and tail flicks of
flycatchers.' Time spent studying books such as the Audubon Society's three volume set, The
Master Guide to Birding will be well worthwhile. The Audubon magazine or journals such as
American Birds or Birding are also extremely informative sources of up-to-date information.
Perhaps the best way to sharpen your skills and increase your expertness as a birder is to get
plenty of experience in birding in a variety of terrains, ranges, and seasons.

*These behavior clues are cited in the Audubon Society's Master Guide to Birding Volume 1:
Loons to Sandpipers, (Knopf: New York: 1983, pp. 20-221. For more information, consult this
excellent three volume set.
Figure 8. A protocol-aided revision for an experienced bird watcher.
A PROCESS MODEL OF PROTOCOL-AIDED REVISION

        As a way to help writers use protocols to guide revision, Figure 9 presents a process
model of protocol-aided revision. The model is intended to help writers/document designers see
the relationship among three components: (1) cognitive processes in protocol-aided revision, (2)
writer/document designer activities while engaged in these processes, and (3) outputs of
processes and activities. The first column, cognitive processes in protocol-aided revision, is
influenced by the revision model designed by Hayes, Flower, Schriver, Stratman, and Carey
(1987), first published in Flower et al. (1986). This model is designed to capture the cognitive
processes involved in using protocols to revise. Protocol-aided revision, like other sorts of text
revision, involves four key subprocesses:

1.     Task Representation-the process of representing the text's goals, constraints, and
       criteria for success;

2.     Detection-the process of seeing or noticing problems;

3.     Diagnosis-the process of characterizing or describing what the problem is; and

4.     Strategy Selection-the process of choosing methods for solving identified
       problems.

         Within each of these subprocesses, writers have a variety of options. The ability to
exercise these options and the ability to choose and carry out effective revisions has been shown
to distinguish experienced from inexperienced writers.

         Protocol-aided revision is different from typical revision (that is, revision that does not
rely on protocols) in several important ways. In protocol-aided revision, the subprocesses are
invoked in a more sequential manner than in typical revision. In typical revision, writers have
considerably more flexibility in whether they engage in the subprocess of diagnosis. Writers
under normal circumstances sometimes make revisions based on "gut reactions" to the text, such
as when the writer says "I am not sure what is wrong with this section of the text, but I do not
like it and will rewrite the whole section." In this case, the writer detects the problem and without
diagnosis, moves directly to selecting a revision strategy. Writers who are using protocol-aided
revision may collect participant feedback in which the participant expresses much the same "I
don't like it" sentiment about the text. However, instead of moving directly to strategy selection,
the writer must pause and try to figure out why the reader is having the problem and what the
nature of the problem is. While the writer using protocol-aided revision is not always able to
diagnose the participant's problem, attempting to do so is important in determining if the problem
is one that other readers may experience and in deciding if the problem needs to be solved.

       Protocol-aided revision is unlike other sorts of revision in that reader feedback guides the
process of representing problems in the text. Under typical circumstances, detecting and
diagnosing problems is constrained by the writer's comprehension and evaluation process. Since
most writers who use protocol-aided revision collect feedback from more than one reader, the
model accounts for how writers use the feedback from multiple readers and how writers make
decisions about what problems to revise. Thus, the model includes the subprocesses of
consolidating readers' comments and identifying important problems. The subprocesses are
hierarchically organized and are intended to illustrate one complete cycle of protocol-aided
revision. The model aims to underscore the recursive nature of protocol-aided revision, showing
that writers must judge the effectiveness of any revision against the goals and criteria they
establish for the text's success.
        A task representation is a set of goals and criteria which the writer uses to guide the
revision process and to evaluate the final product. The writer represents the task by considering
issues such as: the document's goals (such as to instruct or persuade); the audience's needs (for
example, to use the text to learn a new procedure or to make a decision based on the text's
content); the audience's potential problems with the text (for instance, they may fail to
understand the procedures or could misinterpret the content of the text); and, the inevitable
constraints under which revision must take place (that is, lack of time and resources).

        These considerations will provide the writer with information that is important in
designing an evaluation using protocol-aided revision. With information derived from
representing the task, the writer can decide between a reading or a user protocol, determine the
section(s) of the text to evaluate, select participants for the protocol task, and create instructions
for the protocol task.

          But more importantly, task representation provides the writer with two sorts of plans. The
first is a plan for carrying out the revision, that is, a plan for attacking the text's problems,
constructed in light of both goals and constraints. The second is a plan for evaluating the text's
success, often stated in the form of cognitive or affective goals for the reader's interaction with
the text. Unlike writers who are revising a short story or an argument, document designers are
usually in the position to articulate their goals in a precise manner. Document designers can
specify both affective and cognitive goals for the audience of the text in advance. An example of
an affective goal for the reader might be "to have a positive attitude about learning to use an
online help system." A cognitive goal might be that new users of the online help system will be
able "to access the help system and use a tutorial within one hour with a 95% accuracy rate in
issuing commands." When the criteria for a document's success are well specified,
writers/document designers can have a clear sense of the aim of their revision activity.
Articulating the criteria for success also provides explicit guidance about how readers should
respond to a text before it is accepted as "the final version."

        The second subprocess, detection, or the process of seeing problems in text, is a
fundamental revision skill because if the writer never sees problems in the first place, nothing
gets revised. Writing instructors agree that teaching detection skills is very difficult, and that
better ways are needed to help writers see problems in text.

        Detection is a skill that seems to vary depending on authorship and knowledge. Research
shows that difficulty in detecting problems in texts depends, in part, on whether revisors wrote
the text themselves or whether it was created by a writer different from the revisor. Writers
typically have more difficulty seeing problems in their own text than in those created by
someone else (Bartlett, 1982; Hull, 1984). Writers are often too close to the intended meaning in
their text to see it as representing anything less than their intentions. They often view their text as
communicating more effectively than it actually does for the intended reader. Consequently,
authorship of the text, that is, whether the writers are revising their own or someone else's text, is
an important factor determining success in revision.

        Another barrier to the success of the detection process is topic knowledge. Research
shows that writers with substantial topic knowledge of the text's main ideas often have
significant trouble in detecting problems that their documents create for readers without such
knowledge (Bond et al., 1980; Hayes et al., 1986; Schriver, 1987). Bond et al.'s study, for
example, asked legal professionals to revise a loan application for the small business
administration and found that professionals in law had difficulty detecting problems and limited
the focus of their revisions to minor editing changes. Readers who tried to fill out the loan
applications revised by legal professionals found them hard to use and confusing.

       In "If It's Clear to Me, It Must be Clear to Them," Hayes, Schriver, Blaustein, and Spilka
(1986) describe "the knowledge effect" in writing and how topic knowledge prevents writers
from seeing problems in text. Topic knowledge was found to act as a "blinder" to text problems.
High-knowledge revisors tended to overestimate their audience and believed that what was
understandable to them would be clear to anyone.

         Similarly, in a study of teaching writers to predict reader's needs, I found that upperclass
undergraduate writers with basic knowledge of word processing were extremely insensitive in
their ability to predict problems that freshman users would have with poorly-written word
processing manuals (Schriver, 1987, 1989a). The knowledge effect, then, may be the unseen
culprit behind why "high-knowledge experts" such as lawyers, doctors, computer scientists,
engineers, economists, and government representatives frequently produce incomprehensible
texts. It may also provide a clue as to why so many university professors have difficulty in
communicating "the basics" to freshmen in introductory college courses.

        An implication from the research in detection is that writers who are revising their own
text and who have high topic knowledge may be at a considerable disadvantage in seeing the
problems the text may create for readers. One of the most important cognitive advantages of
protocol-aided revision is that it provides a method for "getting around" the effects of knowledge
and authorship. Unlike standard revision procedures which place the responsibility of detecting
problems on the writer, protocol-aided revision places the burden of detection on the reader.
Detection of text problems is carried out while readers are engaged in trying to understand and/or
use the document. The reader's comments, questions, rereadings, and hesitations can be viewed
as flagging possible problems. Very often, the protocols will help writers detect both problems of
commission, that is, problems caused by what the text says, and problems of omission, that is,
problems caused by what the text is missing (Schriver, 1987).

        In protocol-aided revision, the writer/document designer detects problems by reading,
listening, or viewing the audio/video tapes and transcripts, making notes about what readers say
or do. The writer's goal during detection is to notice all problems the text creates for readers.
While not all problems readers detect will be useful in revising the text, it is unwise to throw out
or ignore any problems before evaluating all participants' comments as a group, thus allowing
one to see patterns of error.

        Once possible problems areas have been detected, the writer/document designer is faced
with the somewhat mundane yet necessary evaluative process of consolidating readers'
comments across all protocols. Consolidation of readers' comments should be done in two
complementary ways. The first involves simply identifying the location of text areas where
readers experience problems. This can be done by underscoring the problem areas directly on the
"source text" and placing a tally below the text region for each reader who shares the problem.
But this kind of consolidation provides writers with only a partial representation of the text's
problems. Many times, it is not possible to locate problems in a precise way; problems are often
distributed over whole sections of text. For this reason, it is important to consolidate readers'
comments as well as to record locative information about problems.
         The second kind of consolidation, then, involves using the individual protocol transcripts
or the itemized "reader comment lists" (discussed earlier) to create a master list of problems
across all participants. This list should summarize all candidate problems for revision and
tabulate their frequency. In making this list, the writer must evaluate each comment for its
relevance to the document's goals and criteria for success. This aspect of consolidating readers'
comments draws on the evaluator's skill in recognizing comments that signal problems that
should be dealt with. Writers who have not used protocols to revise their texts often have
difficulties with recognizing (and as mentioned earlier, sometimes with accepting) the problems
readers experience.

         Along with listing what readers disliked or had problems with, it is a useful strategy to
list those aspects of the text that readers liked and had no problems with. While protocols mainly
provide information related to comprehension and use difficulties, readers sometimes comment
on what they like about the text. When this occurs, writers should ask themselves, "What am I
doing right?" "Can this successful part be repeated or done better?" Quite often, the successful
parts of the text can be amplified or used as a model for less successful parts. Another indirect
way to find out what is successful about the text is to examine the protocols for areas where
participants say very little. Such areas usually indicate that readers understand and can use the
text with little effort. Writers may want to try to figure out what is behind readers' effortless
comprehension and use of the text.

        The next process in protocol-aided revision involves identifying the important problems
to attend to. Given the typical constraints under which writers revise, they must give priority to a
subset of the text's problems. In identifying important problems, the writer isolates those
problems which most inhibit the text's success. The output of this activity is a prioritized list of
problems that, if solved, will move the text closer towards meeting its criteria for success.

        After problems to be revised are determined, diagnosis, the process of characterizing the
nature of the problem, becomes important. In diagnosis, revisors must answer: "What is the
cause of the reader's problem?" Isolating the origin of the problem is usually much of the work in
finding its solution. Some problems require minimal, if any, active diagnosis. Recognizing and
classifying problems such as spelling, punctuation, or grammar become highly automated for
experienced writers and editors. Ideally, the text should be free of such low-level problems
before protocol-aided revision begins. Other less well-defined problems, however, call on the
writer's interpretive and problem-solving skills. For example, the reader may say something as
vague as "This information is coming out of nowhere." The revisor must interpret the cause of
the problem, for example, "missing contextual information," and think of a way to remedy it, for
instance, "add new text that creates a context."

        There is now empirical evidence that using protocol-aided revision has benefits that
extend beyond the particular revision situation. With practice in evaluating protocols of readers,
writers can improve their detection and diagnosis skills generally. In a study of teaching writers
to anticipate the reader's needs, I found that writers who were taught to detect and diagnose
readers' problems in think-aloud protocols were significantly better at predicting readers'
problems in texts where no protocol was available than writers who were taught with standard
methods of audience analysis, such as peer critiquing methods or demographic heuristic
techniques (Schriver, 1987). Writers showed dramatic improvement in their ability to predict
readers' problems after their careful analysis of a sequence of lessons in protocol-aided revision
(Schriver, 1984).
        Writers improved most in their ability to detect and diagnose problems caused by what
the text was missing-problems such as missing context, missing purposes, missing procedures.
This research shows the important role that reader feedback can serve in improving writers'
detection and diagnosis skills. It demonstrates writers' ability to learn about readers from
observing readers and that such skills can transfer to new writing contexts. It also suggests that
writers with practice in evaluating protocols are more likely to produce better first drafts because
they are better able to anticipate a reader's response to the text.

        Strategy selection is the act of considering optional means for solving the text's problems.
Quite often, the process of diagnosing the text's problems suggests effective revision strategies.
In selecting strategies, writers are influenced by the type and importance of problems. Some
problems, such as lack of coherence, simply warrant more effort than others. In addition, writers
are influenced by the constraints under which revision takes place. Very often, factors such as
time and cost exert a major influence on our final decisions for revision. The impact of
constraints on the selection of revision strategies is an important and unexplored research area in
writing and document design (Schriver, 1989b). It is clear that writers need better advice on how
to make design decisions under severe constraints.

        During strategy selection, writers aim to identify visual and/or verbal solutions to text
problems. For any solution that involves both visual and verbal text, they must also consider how
best to integrate their proposed solutions. The output of strategy selection is a representation of
ways to solve the text's problems-revise locally, paraphrase, rewrite, or reconceptualize.

        In trying to find ideas for solving the text's problems, it can be helpful to consider readers'
positive evaluations of the text. As discussed earlier, protocol participants sometimes make
suggestions that can be used. More often, however, writers must use their own best judgement,
drawing on all of their experience as readers and writers to make predictions about the solutions
that will best meet the readers' needs. Strategy selection, then, draws on the writer's entire
repertoire of writing and design skills.

        After decisions have been made about what to do, the revisor can then try to fix the text's
problems through activities such as repairing, modifying, or rewriting the text. Once the writer
finishes a complete cycle of protocol-aided revision, the text should be compared against its
goals and criteria for success. The results of this comparison will tell the writer if another cycle
of protocol-aided revision is needed.

IMPLICATIONS OF USING PROTOCOL-AIDED REVISION FOR WRITERS

        As discussed earlier, there were at least two limitations of early conceptions of plain
language. First, it tended to focus on the verbal expression of ideas, and second, it was targeted
primarily at lay audiences and/or low-literate readers. The narrow focus on words and sentences
drew criticism from writers and researchers who were looking for methods to revise texts for
comprehensibility and usability. The goal of this paper was to extend the notions of plain
language and to suggest that protocol-aided revision can help writers achieve plain language in
several important ways:

1.     It can help writers detect and diagnose the difficulties created by what the text says
       and by what it fails to say-difficulties that often inhibit intelligibility and usability.
2.     It can help writers identify the need for creating visual solutions to text problems-
       photographs, pictures, typography,. graphs, formatting, diagrams, flowcharts, and
       tables-and for integrating their visual and verbal decisions.

Methods such as protocol-aided revision that focus on helping writers to become more sensitive
to the complex needs of their intended readers deserve careful attention and further research.


                                           References

American Institute for Research. (1986, February). Plain language pays. Simply Stated,
      Washington, DC: American Institute for Research, Document Design Center, 63, 1-4.

Atlas, M. A. (1981). The user edit: Making manuals easier to use. Institute of Electrical and
       Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Transactions on Professional Communication, PC-24,
       28-29.

Ayoub, M. A., Cole, J. L., Sakala, M. K., & Smillie, R. J. (1974, October). Job performance
      aids: Assessment of needs, final report. Prepared for the Naval Air Systems Command by
      North Carolina State University.

Bartlett, E. J. (1982). Learning to revise: some component processes. In M. Nystrand (Ed.), What
        writers know: The language, process, and structure of written discourse (pp. 345-363).
        New York: Academic Press.

Berkenkotter, C. (1983). Decisions and revisions: The planning strategies of a publishing writer.
      College Composition and Communication, 34 (2), 156-169.

Bond, S. J. (1985). Protocol-aided revision: A tool for making documents usable. Paper
       presented at the IBM Academic Information Systems University AEP Conference,
       Alexandria, VA.

Bond, S. J., Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1980, April). Translating the law into common
       language: A protocol study. Document Design Project (Tech. Rep. No. 8). Pittsburgh,
       PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center.

Borenstein, N. S. (1985). The design and evaluation of online help systems. Doctoral
       dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.

Britton, B. (1986). Capturing art to improve text quality. Educational Psychologist, 21 (4),
        333-356.

Charrow, V. (1979, December). What is plain English, anyway? (Tech. Rep.). Washington, DC:
      American Institute for Research, Document Design Center.

Communications Design Center Newsletter. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University,
     Communications Design Center.
Dieli, M. (1986). Representing the user: Evaluation strategies of expert writers. Paper presented
        at the American Education Research Association (AERA) Conference, San Francisco,
        CA.

Duffy, T. M., & Waller, R. (1985). Designing usable texts. Orlando, FL: Academic Press, Inc.

Duffy, T. M., Post, T., & Smith, G. (1987, May). An analysis of the process of developing
       military technical manuals. Technical Communication, 34 (2), 70-79.

Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge,
       MA: The MIT Press.

Farrand, J. Jr. (Ed). (1983). The Audubon society master guide to birding, Volume l: Loons to
       sandpipers. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.

Felker, D. B. (1980). Document design: A review of the relevant research. Washington, DC:
        American Institute for Research.

Flesch, R. (1949). The art of readable writing. New York, NY: Harper and Row Brothers
        Publishers [revised Harper and Row, 1974].

Flower, L., Hayes, J. R., Carey, L., Schriver, K., & Stratman, J. (1986). Detection, diagnosis and
       the strategies of revision. College Composition and Communication, 37 (1), 16-55.

General Accounting Office. (1979, July). Improved management of maintenance manuals
      needed in DOD (LCD 79-105). Washington, DC: United States General Accounting
      Office.

Garner vs. Cordis. (1987). Case number 86-17971 CA 06. Deposition of Thomas M. Duffy,
       taken on behalf of the defendant pursuant to a notice of taking deposition. Circuit Court
       of the Eleventh Judicial Circuit In and For Dade County Florida. North Miami, Florida:
       General Jurisdiction Division.

Gunning, R. (1952). The technique of clear writing. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Book
      Company [revised 1968].

Hartley, J. (1978). Designing Instructional Text. New York, NY: Nichols Publishing Company.

Hatterick, G. R., & Price, H. E. (1981, May). Technical order managers reference data: Final
       report (AFHRL-TR-80 51). Brooks Air Force Base, TX: Air Force Human Resources
       Laboratory, Air Force Systems Command.

Hayes, J. R. (April, 1982). The use of reading protocols in the editing of text. Paper presented at
       the International Reading Association (IRA), Chicago, IL.

Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1980). Identifying the organization of writing processes. In L. W.
       Gregg & E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
       Erlbaum Associates.
Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1983). Uncovering cognitive processes in writing: An introduction
       to protocol analysis. In P. Mosenthal, L. Tamor, & S. Walmsey (Eds.) Research in
       writing: Principles and methods. New York, NY: Longman.

Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1974). Understanding written problem instructions. In L. W.
       Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge and cognition. Potomac, MD: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Hayes, J. R., Waterman, D. A., & Robinson, C. S. (1977). Identifying the relevant aspects of a
       problem text. Cognitive Science, 1 (3), 297-313.

Hayes, J. R., Schriver, K. A., Blaustein, & Spilka, R. (April, 1986). If it's clear to me, it must be
       clear to them-How knowledge makes it difficult to judge. Paper presented at the
       American Educational Research Association (AERA) Conference, San Francisco, CA.
       Discussed in: J. R. Hayes. (1989). Writing research: The analysis of a very complex task.
       In D. Klahr and K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex information processing: The impact of
       Herbert A. Simon (pp. 209-234). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Hayes, J. R., Flower, L., Schriver, K. A., Stratman, J., & Carey, L. (1987). Cognitive processes
       in revision. In S. Rosenberg (Ed.), Advances in applied psycholinguistics, Volume II:
       Reading, writing, and language processing. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
       Press.

Hull, G. (1984). A performance study of the editing process in writing. Doctoral dissertation,
       Department of English, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

Information Design Journal. Milton Keynes, England: The Open University.

Johnson, S., & Schriver, K. (1986). How to code a user protocol. Unpublished Communications
      Design Center (Tech. Rep.). Pittsburgh, PA: Communications Design Center.

Law Reform Commission of Victoria. (1986). Legislation, legal rights and plain English.
      Discussion Paper No. 1. Law Reform Commission of Victoria, 7th Floor, 160 Queen
      Street, Melbourne, Australia.

McKay, M. F., Petro, A., Magin, R. L., & Resnick, J. A. (1985). High-flying training manuals.
     Society of Technical Communications Proceedings (pp. VC-41-44). Washington, D.C.:
     Society of Technical Communication.

MacNeil/Lehrer Report. (1978, February). Plain English. Library # 625, Show 3165,
     WNET/WETA. New York, NY: Educational Broadcasting Company.

Mills, C. B., & Dye, K. L. (1985). Usability testing: User reviews. Technical Communication,
       32 (4), 40-44.

Norman, D. A. (1981) A psychologist views human processing: Human errors and other
     phenomena suggest processing mechanisms. Vol. II Proceedings of the International
     Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: IJCAI.
Payne, J. W., & Ragsdale. (1978). Verbal protocols and direct observation of supermarket
       shopping behavior: Some findings and a discussion of methods. In H. K. Hunt (Ed.),
       Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 5. Chicago, IL: Association for Consumer
       Research.

Roberts, D. D., & Sullivan, P. A. (1984). Beyond the static audience construct: Reading
       protocols in the technical writing class. Journal of Technical Writing and
       Communication, 14, 143-153.

Schriver, K. A. (1984). Revising computer documentation for comprehension: Ten
       exercises in protocol-aided revision (Tech. Rep. No. 14). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie
       Mellon University, Communications Design Center.

Schriver, K. A. (1987). Teaching writers to anticipate the reader's needs: Empirically-based
       instruction. Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.

Schriver, K. A. (1989a). Moving from sentence-level to whole-text revision: Helping writers
       focus on the reader's needs. In K. A. McCormick (Ed.), Expanding the repertoire: An
       anthology of practical approaches for the teaching of writing (Reading-to-Write Report
       No. 11, Center for the Study of Writing; Technical Report No. 30, pp. 46-57). Berkeley,
       CA: University of California, Center for the Study of Writing.

Schriver, K. A. (1989b). Document design from 1980 to 1990: Challenges that remain. Technical
       Communication, 36 (4), 316-333.

Schriver, K.A. (1989c). Evaluating text quality: The continuum from text focused to reader
       focused approaches. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 32 (4),
       238-255.

Schriver, K. A., Hayes, J. R., Danley, C., Wulff, W., Davies, L, Cerroni, K., Graham, D., Flood,
       E., & Bond, E. (1986). Designing computer documentation: A review of the
       literature-hardcopy, online, general applications (Tech. Rep. No. 31). Pittsburgh, PA:
       Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center.

Schriver, K. A., & Hayes, J. R. (in preparation). Differences between expert and novice computer
       users in preferred type of documentation-hardcopy or online (Technical Report).
       Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University, Communications Design Center.

Simon, H. A., & Gilmartin, K. A. (1973). A simulation of memory for chess positions. Cognitive
       Psychology, 5, 29-46.

Soderston, C. (1985). The usability edit: A new level. Technical Communication, 1st Quarter,
       16-18.

Sommers, N. I. (1980). Revision strategies of student writers and experienced writers. College
     Composition and Communication, 31, 378-387

Smagorinsky, P. (1989). The reliability and validity of protocol analysis. Written
      Communication, 6 (4), 463-479.
Strunk, W. Jr., & White, E. B. (1959). The elements of style. New York: Macmillan.

Swaney, J. H., Janik, C. J., Bond, S. J., & Hayes, J. R. (1981). Editing for comprehension:
      Improving the process through reading protocols (Document Design Project Report No.
      14). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University.

Winbush, B., & McDowell, G. (1980). Testing: How to increase the usability of computer
      manuals. Technical Communication, 4th Quarter, 20-22.

Winkler, V. M., Ferguson, R., & Youngquist, D. (1985). Procedures for designing and evaluating
      training manuals. Proceedings of the Society for Technical Communications (pp.
      RET-6-9). Washington, DC: Society of Technical Communication.

Witman, W. (1987). Using reading protocols to edit documents: A case study. Proceedings of the
      Society for Technical Communications (pp. RET-159-161). Washington, DC: Society of
      Technical Communication.
