What Do Technical Communicators Need to
Know about Information Design?

Karen Schriver, PhD
KSA Communication Design & Research




© 2013 University of Chicago Press

Citation
Schriver, K. (2013). What do technical communicators need to know
about information design? In J. Johnson-Eilola & S. Selber (Eds.),
Solving problems in technical communication (pp. 386-427). Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.

Author’s note
This chapter is from a book aimed at college students taking courses in
technical, scientific, or professional communication. The editors requested
that each chapter follow a prescribed structure: (1) the posing of a practical
problem of communication, (2) a brief literature review, (3) a heuristic
exploring how to solve the problem, (4) an extended practical example that
shows the heuristic in action, and (5) a set of discussion questions for
classroom use.

Point of contact
Karen Schriver
KSA Communication Design & Research
33 Potomac Street
Oakmont, Pennsylvania 15139 USA
kschriver@earthlink.net
                 karen schriver




16               What Do Technical Communicators Need
                 to Know about Information Design?




summary
As a technical communicator, you will need to develop your expertise not
only in writing, but also in information design. Whether you are design-
ing reports about the environment or manuals for smartphones, you will
need to be concerned with how to present your messages visually and ver-
bally. As organizations around the globe expand the audiences for whom
they create products and services, the demand for well-designed text and
graphics has become increasingly important. Although most technical
communicators have honed their skills in verbal expression, they often
lack knowledge of information design and have few strategies for integrat-
ing visual and verbal content. They may not be familiar with the grow-
ing research on information design that could help them make decisions
about designing content spatially and typographically. This chapter oﬀers
a heuristic for structuring content visually and for making the structure
salient through grouping, organizing, and signaling.

introduction
Miguel recently acquired a new job with a government agency within the
U.S. Department of Agriculture. His department’s mission is to spread
the word about healthy eating habits to families across the United States.
Miguel’s supervisor started him oﬀ in his new position with two tasks.
The ﬁrst task is to revise a ﬂyer for parents about healthy foods and their
beneﬁts. The ﬂyer consists of a list of foods that research has shown to
be nutritious, and gives reasons why they are nutritious. Miguel’s second
task is more demanding. His supervisor asked him to create the ﬁrst in a
new series of documents to inform parents about issues related to nutri-
tion—issues such as obesity, nutritional supplements, weight gain, natu-
ral cures, and myths about healthy eating. The supervisor expects that
Miguel’s document will serve as a template for the series. He told Miguel
that the research on healthy eating has changed substantially since the
department last printed its information, rendering the previous content
386


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
obsolete. Miguel must begin with a careful review of the current research
on nutrition. He recognizes that to do the task well, he must synthesize the
most recent nutritional research and then design the content from scratch.
   Miguel’s overall goal for these tasks is to create easy-to-understand texts
that can be presented on paper or on the department’s website. He begins
by searching many nutrition-related databases with an eye toward compil-
ing the available data that could be used to make recommendations for
healthy eating. Initially, he thinks the task is obvious and straightforward,
but he begins to feel a bit overwhelmed when he ﬁnds that the amount
of available research is enormous, and that it is scattered across profes-
sional and popular literature in print and on the web. Moreover, much of
the information he ﬁnds is contradictory, making it hard to understand
and to draw conclusions from.
   What approach could Miguel take to meet these rhetorical challenges?
How should he proceed in making decisions about the content? Once he
gathers the appropriate content, how can he design the information so
that it will be easy for any parent to understand? What are the alternatives
for organizing the material visually and verbally? What are the options
for displaying the content spatially? What sorts of graphics could he use?
Could his choice of typography encourage reading?
   This chapter presents a heuristic that Miguel could use for addressing
these rhetorical challenges or other complex problems in technical com-
munication. In particular, the heuristic explores three information-design
principles for making one’s thinking visible to readers: (1) grouping con-
tent rhetorically, (2) organizing content visually, and (3) signaling struc-
tural relationships. Each of these principles will be explored through
practical examples that illustrate how they can guide technical commu-
nication. Taken together, the ideas presented in this chapter can help you
place more emphasis on designing visually—attending carefully to issues
of graphics, spatial display, or typography—and focus more attention on
making the structure of your content visible to readers. When techni-
cal communication skills are combined with sophistication in informa-
tion design, it can lead not only to more eﬀective professional commu-
nications, but also to the development of the communicator’s expertise
(Schriver 2012). This chapter will help you expand your repertory of strate-
gies for solving communication problems by drawing on evidence-based
principles of information design.

why research on information design is useful
As the above scenario from the Department of Agriculture shows, technical
communicators could beneﬁt from research about strategies for visual de-
                                                            Information Design | 387


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
sign. In this way, they could both manage their own creative process and do
a good job in persuading supervisors that their design choices are sound.
Research on information design helps technical communicators under-
stand how diﬀerent people typically engage with visual and verbal content.
It provides insight into the kinds of textual or graphic “moves” that tend
to make content clear and understandable—promoting comprehension,
satisfaction, and usability. Moreover, information-design research shows
us how visual design may inﬂuence the persona projected by the content
and how design can inﬂuence whether readers believe in the credibility
of the content and the trustworthiness of the authors (Schriver 1997).

what is information design?
Information design is the art and science of integrating writing and de-
sign so that people can use content in ways that suit their personal goals.
Information design involves making communication artifacts by shaping
verbal language and visual language (and increasingly, in many technical
and scientiﬁc contexts, mathematical language). A fundamental goal for
information design is to enable and enhance relationships among stake-
holders for an artifact—that is, among the variety of audiences, clients,
critics, readers, listeners, users, and viewers who have a stake in the con-
tent. The ﬁeld of information design focuses on devising novel ways to en-
able relationships among people through the eﬀective design of content
(Frascara 2010). By drawing on principles of information design, technical
communicators can design more rhetorically eﬀective communications.
   As technical communicators shape their communications for stake-
holders, they need to orchestrate word and image in order to achieve the
optimal selection of content, the most appropriate organization, the best
level of detail, and the best mix of media. Of course, achieving the opti-
mum is not easy. Research tells us that technical communicators need to
acquire sophisticated skills in modeling stakeholders’ processes of inter-
pretation (Schriver 1989, 1997). When research is available that can help
them make better choices, experienced technical communicators opt for
writing and design strategies that have been evaluated for their eﬀective-
ness with readers.
   Experienced technical communicators recognize that they may per-
ceive content diﬀerently than their audiences, who typically bring diﬀer-
ent knowledge, background, experience, or culture to bear during inter-
pretation. Experts pay close attention to the ﬁndings of empirical research
in order to understand the kinds of writing or design choices that may
help or hinder readers as they attempt to make sense of text and graphics.


388 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
The stakes are high because bad information design can leave stakehold-
ers with a lasting negative impression, inviting them to ignore a message,
misunderstand it, poke fun at it, or simply give up and stop reading. Tech-
nical communicators need to worry about people’s cognitive and emo-
tional responses to their content.

information design emphasizes the visual
The emphasis on designing content visually stems from information de-
signers’ long-standing belief that the appearance of a communication in-
ﬂuences whether people will want to read it. Studies of reading show that
people who are confronted with content begin to interpret that content
immediately (Anderson 2009), and that the visual display of that content
can help or hinder people’s interpretation. Research suggests that people
may form immediate opinions of the visual display of content. For ex-
ample, website users found it easy to rate a website as attractive or unat-
tractive, and surprisingly, they could make such judgments reliably and
consistently based on their looking at a webpage for only one-twentieth of
a second (Lindgaard et al. 2006).
   Moreover, researchers have shown that people remember content pre-
sented visually more easily than content presented verbally (Paivio 1969).
Importantly, research ﬁnds that a careful integration of both words and
pictures engages people more eﬀectively than either alone (Sadoski and
Paivio 2001). When designers provide access to their content through both
visual and verbal means—what psychologists call “dual coding”—read-
ers will have two ways of understanding the content and are more likely
to remember it (Paivio 1990). Studies show that people tend to remember
more when they acquire new content visually and verbally, rather than just
visually or just verbally.
   Because the human eye is hardwired to interpret and organize what
we see, people tend to make immediate inferences about what they see in
their ﬁeld of vision. This aspect of human interpretative processes has im-
plications for information design. On one hand, if the visual display meets
the readers’ expectations, readers will recognize the structural cues, be
able to navigate the content, and be more likely to sustain their reading.
On the other hand, it also means that if the visual display of the text does
not attract viewers or confuses them, reading may never begin or will stop
before much of the content is considered.
   While research on information design is broad and diverse, technical
communicators can most productively start with three areas central to
displaying content visually:


                                                            Information Design | 389


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
  • grouping content rhetorically,
  • organizing content visually to show contrasts, and
  • signaling structural relationships.

grouping content rhetorically
Technical communicators already know how important it is to shape their
writing with a reader or viewer in mind. Taking an audience-centered per-
spective applies to grouping content as well. Information designers are
concerned with making sure the visual display of the content is rhetori-
cally eﬀective. This means formatting the content into meaningful groups
that readers will notice, expect, and appreciate.
   Research suggests that visual grouping gives readers a sense of the
overall structure (Tullis 1997). When text and graphics are organized into
meaningful semantic clusters, it makes it easier for readers to chunk the
content (Kahn, Tan, and Beaton 1990). Grouping can also reduce cogni-
tive load by helping readers remember content, which can make the con-
tent seem less complex, leading to fewer errors and increased satisfaction
(Niemela and Saarinen 2000).

   Grouping Can Be Visual or Verbal
   Technical communicators are highly adept at grouping verbal content
according to its purpose. For example, in authoring user assistance, writ-
ers separate overview information from procedural information. In con-
structing a report about a scientiﬁc research study, the writer purposely
separates information relevant to the literature review from material about
the study proper. In fact, a good part of technical communicators’ work in-
volves grouping content strategically, striving to make implicit structures
explicit for readers.
   Technical communicators can make verbal groups more evident by
employing visual devices such as sidebars, itemized lists, boxes, shading,
color, and white space. When content is formatted consistently (e.g., all
procedures use enumerated lists with a short line length while all over-
view text is formatted with a longer line length), readers can readily per-
ceive intended relationships among the content elements.
   In addition to technical communicators’ developing skills in visually
structuring verbal content, it is also important for them to develop strate-
gies for grouping visual content spatially; for examples, see Brumberger
and Northcut 2012. Structuring visual content involves grouping visual
materials to make an argument or to tell a story, creating purpose-driven
groups from source materials such as photos, technical illustrations, digi-
tal art, tables, charts, diagrams, and data displays.
390 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   Grouping Can Have Cognitive and Aﬀective Beneﬁts for Readers
   When content is grouped in ways that allow readers to form mean-
ingful relationships among the elements, readers can often make con-
nections across the content that they might miss otherwise. Grouping
content spatially makes the content more coherent, allowing readers to
recognize how the pieces of the message ﬁt together. In this way, grouping
helps make what otherwise might be invisible structures apparent to the
reader. Grouping not only organizes the content, it also renders it visually
conspicuous—quite important for busy readers, impatient readers, less-
able readers, and people who are reading in a second language.
   How the content is grouped may also inﬂuence readers’ ﬁrst impres-
sions of the message (Lindgaard et al. 2006), setting in motion positive
or negative attitudes about the content (Schriver 1997). This makes it im-
portant to catch the reader’s attention and to make a good impression at
ﬁrst glance.

   Grouping Can Simplify Complex Content
   Technical communicators are often faced with the task of reorganizing
lengthy content into meaningful groups, particularly as they help their
clients move content from paper to the web. Breaking the text into short
paragraphs (e.g., one to three sentences) promotes faster reading, and im-
portantly, the shorter length inﬂuences readers’ sense of how much eﬀort
it will take to read. Researchers at the Poynter Institute for Media Studies
used eye tracking to investigate how people read print and online news-
papers. They found that readers skim and scan the content, following the
modular clusters of the newspaper’s layout (Stark Adam, Quinn, and Ed-
monds 2007). In a related study, readers tended to give stories with short
paragraphs twice as much attention as those with longer paragraphs (Out-
ing and Ruel 2004).

   Grouping Can Show Semantic Relationships
   By clustering content in ways that make the text simple and inviting,
technical communicators can make reading less eﬀortful. We can also use
grouping to show how the content is logically and semantically related.
For example, we can use white space to group semantically related con-
tent. When groups of content are positioned in close proximity, whether
on a page or screen, readers can easily infer their relatedness. In this way,
proximity is a powerful grouping tool.
   Grids (discussed later in this chapter) are ways to structure space. They
are modular visual design systems for organizing pages, screens, and three-
dimensional spaces. They can be powerful tools for showing semantic
                                                            Information Design | 391


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
relationships among elements of information spaces. Technical commu-
nicators can beneﬁt from gaining familiarity with concepts related to the
design of typographic grid systems—concepts such as layering, grouping,
separating, zoning, and highlighting (Müller-Brockmann 1985; Keyes 1993;
Samara 2002). Some of these concepts, mainly developed by design practi-
tioners, have been tested; for example, research ﬁnds that by aligning con-
tent elements and by consistently positioning them, designers can help
viewers ﬁnd information more quickly (Parush, Nadir, and Schtub 1998).
   The overall visual look, including the layout, signiﬁcantly shapes users’
perceptions of consistency and their satisfaction in browsing tasks (Ozok
and Salvendy 2000). When readers can form judgments about the nature
of the content quickly and see how elements are related, they are more
likely to continue reading. Studies of how people read on the web suggest
that getting people to sustain their reading represents one of the biggest
challenges for authors of websites, and that people expect content that is
organized to ﬁt their unique reasons for coming to the content (Schriver
2010). Getting people to read and keep reading is an important beneﬁt of
grouping content rhetorically.

organizing content visually to show contrasts
In the early part of the twentieth century, Gestalt psychologists systemati-
cally studied how the properties of the visual world shape our perceptions
(Wertheimer 1922; Köhler 1947). One of the earliest discoveries of Gestalt
psychology was that the way things look depends not just on the proper-
ties of their elementary parts, but also, and more importantly, on their
organization. They pointed out that contrast is fundamental to human per-
ception and that the human eye is attracted to areas of high contrast (dark-
light, large-small, thick-thin, saturated color–unsaturated color).1 In de-
signing content, contrast can be rendered graphically or typographically.

   Enhancing Contrast
   Technical communicators can create graphic contrast by juxtaposing
changes in size, shape, color, weight, saturation, and position (Mullet and
Sano 1995; Tufte 1983). When used purposefully, contrast can reveal the ar-
chitecture of the content, making the hierarchy visually present and help-
ing readers see relationships among the parts (Ivory, Sinha, and Hearst
2001). Contrast also helps people as they search for content. It highlights
key information on a page, segregating main points from minor ones (Jen-
kins and Cole 1982; Scharﬀ, Hill, and Ahumada 2000). Contrast can be
achieved in many ways: for example, through integrating pictures within
pictures, text within text, and pictures in relation to texts. When the eye
392 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
is confronted with contrast, it provokes curiosity and invites the reader to
look closer to see what is going on.
    The best typographic contrast is achieved by using black type on a
white background. In every study in which this aspect of the text has been
studied, the same result was obtained: the darker the type and the whiter
the background, the better the legibility of the text (Scharﬀ, Hill, and Ahu-
mada 2000; Muter and Marrutto 1991). Moreover, studies of low-vision
readers suggest that contrast is a fundamental perceptual aid to their see-
ing the text at all. Reece (2002) found that low-vision readers rely heavily
on typographic contrast to see the text, adding extra reason for technical
communicators to concentrate on building eﬀective typographic contrast
into the overall design of their content.
    Researchers have studied the role of typographic features in text design
since the 1800s. Consequently, most of what we know about typographic
design has been derived from the way people read on paper. In the past
decade or so, researchers in journalism, information design, usability,
and human factors have conducted studies of online typography. Some
ﬁndings of the typographic research apply to both print and online in-
formation design, while other ﬁndings apply particularly to print or to
electronic displays (computer screens, tablet displays, smartphones).

   Typeface: Serif or Sans Serif?
   Research that applies to both print and online applications tells us that
typographic contrast is a critical feature of good design. Good typography
clearly signals the hierarchy and structure of content. When the contrast
is working well, readers or viewers can easily make discriminations about
how the content is organized. Moreover, good contrast facilitates search
and rapid retrieval of information. Typographic contrast can be signaled
in many ways, including contrasts of light to dark, thick to thin, roman
type to italic, uppercase to lowercase, serif to sans serif. Figure 16.1 shows
the diﬀerence between a serif typeface (16-point Palatino) and a sans serif
typeface (16-point Myriad Pro).
   In the research on typography, one ﬁnding appears repeatedly in the lit-
erature. Studies comparing serif and sans serif faces ﬁnd that readers pay
more attention to the amount of contrast among styles within a typeface
(e.g., light, medium, bold, extrabold, black) than they do to the distinc-
tion between serif and sans serif (Schriver 1997; Spencer, Reynolds, and
Coe 1974).
   Research shows that when the typographic resolution is excellent,
serif or sans serif typefaces are equally legible and equally fast to read.
Thus, when text is printed on paper at high resolution, the text will be
                                                            Information Design | 393


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   In a number of studies, low-vision readers (that is, severe loss of vision
even with glasses) and readers with “normal” vision (that is, 20 / 20 with or
without glasses), were found to prefer sans serif to serif type in computer
displays 87–95% of the time (Reece 2002). Readers also preferred roman
(nonitalic) type to italic type (67–82% of the time). Overall, Reece’s study
underscores the importance of typographic contrast for low-vision read-
ers and suggests that both reduced-vision readers and normal readers
show strong preferences for sans serif typefaces online. Theofanos and
Redish (2005) remind us that it is important to think about low-vision us-
ers when we design text for online displays because vision impairments
are more prevalent than we think and the number is growing as the baby
boomer generation ages.

   Type Size
   Generally speaking, research on type size has investigated the impact
of point size on reading speed, reading accuracy, and reader preference.
Most studies have concentrated on the point sizes that are most legible for
body text: 10-point, 12-point, and 14-point type (Bernard and Mills 2000;
Bernard, Liao, and Mills 2001; Dyson 2004). The results of these studies are
fairly consistent, leading researchers to draw these conclusions.

  • Ten-point type is read more slowly, but more accurately, than
    12-point.
  • Twelve-point is read faster, but less accurately, than 10-point.
  • Smaller typography slows reading, but tends to be read with better
    accuracy (perhaps because more concentration is required to
    see it).
  • Most readers prefer larger type (12-point to 14-point) rather than
    smaller type (10-point).
  • Children (ages nine to eleven) prefer 14-point sans serif.
  • Older readers (ages seventy and above) prefer 14-point sans serif.
  • Partially sighted or visually impaired readers prefer 14-point to
    16-point sans serif.

   Uppercase versus Lowercase Type
   When sentences and paragraphs are displayed using upper-case type
(all capital letters), they can be hard to read (Vartabedian 1971). When text
is set in all uppercase, the text is rendered a uniform rectangle, without
the distinctive word shapes that allow for rapid reading. In fact, when the
body text is displayed in all capital letters, reading speed can be slowed
about 13 to 20% (Breland and Breland 1944).
                                                            Information Design | 395


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   Recent discussions of typographic case remind us that there is noth-
ing inherently unreadable about uppercase (Weinschenk 2009). Rather,
readers’ familiarity with upper- and lowercase may underlie the superior
reading speed associated with mixed case. In short, we read typographic
displays more quickly when the text is formatted in ways that are more fa-
miliar, which for readers in Western cultures means type set using upper-
and lowercase letters. Vartabedian’s research also shows that when up-
percase is employed sparingly, it can make it easy to locate those items
because they stand out due to the contrast.
   Reading speed is optimal when uppercase and lowercase letters are
used together (Rickards and August 1975). The variation in character height
among upper- and lowercase letters allows rapid discrimination of letters
and facilitates word recognition (Paterson and Tinker 1946). Thus, a com-
bination of upper- and lowercase makes the reading process more smooth
and eﬃcient, enabling the eye to track the text more easily. When extra em-
phasis is needed, bold has been found to be a better cue than uppercase
(Coles and Foster 1975).

signaling structural relationships
Technical communicators signal the content’s structure in two primary
ways: visually (through layout and typography) and verbally (through cues
such as topic sentences, logical connectives, and overviews).

   Signaling Visually
   To signal the structure visually, we can use a variety of graphic and
typographic techniques—size, position, weight, style, repetition, and
alignment. For instance, suppose a technical communicator wanted to
show that three textual elements were of equal importance in the hierar-
chy of a communication. It would be appropriate to signal the elements
by (1) aligning them vertically as columns of equal size, and (2) giving each
column a heading using the same typographic styles. These visual signals
would show the parallel nature of the elements within the structure.
   Size and position are primary visual cues to signal importance. When
a message is dominated by a few large elements (e.g., photos), their size
tells the reader they have priority in the message structure. Alternatively,
when textual content is placed in a focal position for the reader (such as
on the ﬁrst page of a website), that position indicates the element’s sig-
niﬁcance within the context.
   Signaling the various levels of the text’s structure can be accomplished
through choices in typography. When well chosen, the typographic treat-
ments allow readers to distinguish among, for example, ﬁrst-level, second-
396 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
level, and third-level headings. By signaling the structure conspicuously,
readers are more likely to notice important relationships in the content
and to recognize thematic continuities.
   In cases in which encouraging the reader to notice is critical, such as a
warning label on a medicine bottle, designers often employ double signal-
ing—that is, using more than one cue to draw attention to the message.
For example, signals could involve size, weight (e.g., boldface), color, or
position. However, it is important to be judicious in signaling with typog-
raphy, as too many signals (e.g., too much boldface) or too much repeti-
tion of a particular cue (e.g., too many itemized lists in a row) can ﬂat-
ten the visual hierarchy, making it hard to tell what is important because
nearly everything is signaled.
   Designers strive to make their layouts show at a glance the rhetorical
relationships among message elements. They do so by using features such
as grids, colors, shapes, backgrounds, orientation, and size; for a case
study of forms redesign, see Schriver 2011. Research suggests that these
dominant features are perceived immediately, making it important that
they are well designed and that they cue the structure eﬀectively (Mal-
amed 2009).

   Signaling Verbally
   Lengthy or complex content may be signaled by layering the content
into levels, with more abstract or general content at the top level and more
speciﬁc content at lower levels of the hierarchy. Technical communica-
tors aim to make the structure explicit through careful composition of
verbal cues, including previews, summaries, sidebars, headings, subhead-
ings, topic sentences, advance questions, logical connectives (e.g., and, or,
consequently, next), structural cues (e.g., ﬁrst, second; on one hand, on the
other), metadiscursive cues (recall my ﬁrst point, imagine the opposite inter-
pretation), pull quotes, legends, and captions (Spyridakis 1989a, 1989b).
   Many print and online documents have a hierarchical structure, sig-
naled by making broader topics (or more important topics) more promi-
nent than speciﬁc topics (or less important topics). Subtopics are typically
cued by subordination (Farkas 2005). For example, a website’s home page
is at the top of the hierarchy, its links provide branches to content at a
more speciﬁc level, and these branches are split again at each level of the
hierarchy. While simple content often has a structure only two levels deep,
more complex content often requires a four-level or ﬁve-level structure.
   Designers can improve the quality of their content by (1) organizing it
into logical and semantically related rhetorical groups, (2) thinking care-
fully about how many levels of content are needed, (3) determining how
                                                            Information Design | 397


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
story might be composed of text, a few levels of headings, a photograph,
and a caption. Readers who examine a newspaper might be attracted ﬁrst
to the photograph. Many readers would then inspect the caption in order
to interpret the photograph. This coupling during interpretation makes
the photograph and the caption work in concert as a rhetorical cluster.
The idea is to guide interpretation and to arouse the reader’s curiosity.

   Rhetorical Clustering versus Chunking
   A rhetorical cluster is not a chunk, a commonly used term in techni-
cal communication to describe written text that has been segmented into
short self-contained topics suitable for presentation on a screen. Chunks
described by technical communicators do not correspond to those dis-
cussed by psychologists who study human memory. For psychologists, a
chunk represents a package of related information in long-term memory
(Miller 1956). When technical communicators characterize chunking, they
mean introducing white space to break up large sections of text, or design-
ing itemized lists or tables in lieu of lengthy paragraphs. Chunking can
help busy readers see a lengthy text as more manageable. It can also facili-
tate readers’ scanning, particularly when each chunk has a clear heading
or caption.
   Chunking is usually considered an editing strategy for tightening the
writing in order to make the chunks of content stand on their own while
ﬁtting them into a larger text structure. In contrast, rhetorical clustering
is an invention and planning strategy for writing or design, encouraging
audience-centric groupings of content for maximum rhetorical impact.
While chunking focuses on breaking up an existing text into smaller top-
ics, rhetorical clustering organizes visual and verbal content in ways that
allow readers to see important relationships among textual and graphic
elements, for example, hierarchical relationships, logical connections,
semantic or temporal relations. It is a good idea to consider these rela-
tionships prior to considerations of chunking, but certainly they interact.

   Devising Preliminary Groupings for the Content
   Before choosing a scheme for grouping the content into rhetorical
clusters, consider readers’ likely purposes and goals for using the infor-
mation. Draw on what you know about their knowledge, beliefs, expecta-
tions, culture, and reading level as you devise a preliminary grouping.
Make use of familiar genre patterns (such as problem-solution, if-then, or
cause-eﬀect) as you think about optional designs. Sketch a few structures
for the content, exploring diﬀerent ways of grouping the key ideas.


                                                            Information Design | 399


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   Figure 16.3 shows how a technical communicator’s goals for the con-
tent can be paired with familiar patterns for organizing ideas. It presents
a few typical goals for content and some attendant grouping techniques.
   •   Explain: ﬂowcharts and hierarchy maps
   •   Unfold in layers: pyramids—iceberg and inverted pyramids
   •   Narrate: temporal sequencing
   •   Instruct: topical progressions or action / step sequences
   •   Compare: itemized lists, matrixes, tables
   •   Illustrate part-to-whole: picture-in-picture, hierarchical ﬂow
   •   Detail cause and eﬀect: node networks (or concept maps) and ﬂow
       diagrams
   These grouping techniques oﬀer ideas for organizing an overall struc-
ture or for nesting diﬀerent structures. Using multiple types of rhetorical
clusters in the same artifact adds visual contrast and interest to the con-
tent, especially to those typically text-heavy genres such as letters, instruc-
tions, reports, and proposals. Figure 16.3 shows only a few of the many
grouping techniques available to technical communicators.
   Good communicators know that the same content can usually be pre-
sented in many ways. But even skilled technical communicators may fall
short of planning innovative designs because they ignore the generative
power of “trial balloons” en route to a good prototype. Because they work
under the pressure of tight deadlines, technical communicators may rely
on the ﬁrst organizational pattern they think of, or merely dump their
content into predetermined slots of a template.
   Rhetorical clustering is a practical way to try out diﬀerent structures
early in the writing and design process before too many commitments
are made. By exploring alternative organizational patterns, technical com-
municators are more likely to generate a better structure for their content.
   Rhetorical clustering allows communicators to form a visual roadmap,
helpful in planning an artifact’s big picture as well as its little picture.
For example, a technical communicator may organize a website using the
iceberg approach, also called progressive disclosure or staged disclosure
(Lidwell, Holden, and Butler 2003; Nielson 2006). In using the iceberg ap-
proach, the technical communicator strives to simplify complex content
by organizing it as layers, deferring details or advanced topics to lower in
the structure (see ﬁgure 16.3, “unfold in layers”). Layer 1 is the top level, or
tip of the iceberg. For websites, this is the home page, and here technical
communicators must integrate a number of key rhetorical clusters—such
as one devoted to organizational identity (logo, name, taglines), another to
products or services, and others to navigation and structure. When these
400 | Chapter 16


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
means supplementary information (e.g., audio, video, PDFs) and links to
related content.
   In contrast to the iceberg approach is the inverted pyramid, another
technique for layering content, typically used by journalists (see ﬁg-
ure 16.3). With this method of structuring content, the most important
or newsworthy information is presented ﬁrst (represented by the widest
part of the pyramid). The key rhetorical cluster for the beginning of a news
story—the lead—concisely capsules who, what, when, where, why, and
how. Level 2 of the news story provides the details, often with rhetorical
clusters of text, photos, charts, and graphs. And the third level oﬀers more
background information that completes the story. As we can see, the ice-
berg approach and the inverted pyramid can make it easier to organize
the text at the global level and to construct reader-oriented goals for each
rhetorical cluster.

phase 2: organize clusters visually to show contrasts
The second phase of the heuristic (shown in ﬁgure 16.2) points to the need
to organize rhetorical clusters visually, with the goal of making visible the
intended contrasts among elements. Research reminds us that readers
tend to form ﬁrst impressions of content quickly, cuing on the structure
and the tone. It is important to organize the visual display of the text and
graphics by considering the order in which readers (or viewers) may look
at them. This means striving to guide the reader’s eye through the content
by making the structure visibly clear. The reader’s priorities for using the
content should dictate the overall spatial display and the need for predict-
ability in the content’s positioning.
    Some of the time, it will be useful to visually organize the layout by using
a grid—a modular system for spatially displaying the content in columns
and rows. Grids allow consistent positioning of textual and graphic genre
elements (e.g., all ﬁrst-level headings of a report will ﬁt on one line span-
ning columns 1 and 2; if the headings need more horizontal space, the de-
signer will shorten them to ﬁt the grid). At other times, the content needs to
stand out from the rest of the text or graphics (the surround), and the grid
will need to be broken. Providing contrast sometimes means interrupting
the rhythm of a sequence. For example, we can break the ﬂow of well-
organized but heavily textual content with dramatic changes in size and
proportion by interspersing occasional full-page graphics. Sometimes no
grid is preferable. Space limitations for this chapter prohibit an extended
discussion of layout and grid design, but technical communicators can
proﬁt from exploring the graphic possibilities aﬀorded by designing grid
systems. Technical communicators need practice in trying out alternative
402 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
grids for their projects, in learning when to make purposeful deviations
from a grid, and in realizing when to abandon a grid entirely; for a discus-
sion of making and breaking of grid systems, see Müller-Brockmann 1985
and Samara 2002.
   In organizing rhetorical clusters visually to show desired contrasts (e.g.,
diﬀerences in hierarchy, function, logic, semantics, time), it is important
to try out diﬀerent spatial displays and gauge their relative impact. Once a
few alternative displays have been ﬂeshed out, it is a good time in the de-
sign process to assess people’s interpretations of the prototypes. Obtain-
ing early feedback oﬀers a crucial sense of how people (outside of the de-
sign team) may construct the persona projected by the information design
(e.g., serious, playful, manipulative, corporate, condescending). Feedback
from stakeholders can help technical communicators reconsider issues
such as the shape, size, position, and proximity of clusters, as well as
about how diﬀerent clusters interact when juxtaposed (Schriver 1997).

phase 3: signal structural relations
Once the content has been grouped and meaningful contrasts have been
established, technical communicators need to ensure that readers will
readily grasp the structure of the message. This requires revisiting stake-
holders’ likely purposes for engaging with the content, to determine which
content elements should be signaled explicitly. The third phase of the
information-design heuristic (shown in ﬁgure 16.2) asks technical com-
municators to signal structural relations. The signaling phase operates
recursively with the processes of grouping and organizing—each set of
decisions dynamically inﬂuences the others. For example, the choices a
technical communicator makes in designing the page or screen using ty-
pographic cues may lead to a reconsideration of proportions for the grid
design. A change in the shape of a text element might suggest a change
of color to make that shape recede or become more prominent. Indeed,
every information-design decision can have an impact on every other.
   The technical communicator’s goal in carrying out the third phase of
the heuristic is to guide the reader’s eye through the content by carefully
choosing signals that establish the structure and tone. This can be accom-
plished, for example, through strategic use of white space, color, shading,
typography, line length, or other signals. As we saw in the research reviewed
earlier, signaling can be visual or verbal—carried out graphically, typo-
graphically, or linguistically. Above all, choose graphic and typographic
cues that reveal meaningful relationships in the hierarchy of the content.
   If the message is primarily textual, strive for typographic cues that
emphasize contrasts that bring the structure to the fore. Let us take an
                                                            Information Design | 403


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
right and putting a gray box behind all laptops that are $500 or less). The
idea is to use graphic cues such as size, position, alignment, background,
and color to make relationships salient for readers. In this way, readers
can glance over the content and quickly determine how items are related,
which ones look interesting, and which items to skip.
   Readers of such catalogs would expect that similar products would
have descriptive blurbs of about the same length. Having text that is visu-
ally parallel shows readers that they are scanning a family of competing
products. By drawing on both textual and graphic cues, the technical com-
municator could call attention to particular products that have special
features, such as smartphones that have GPS tracking. The technical com-
municator might decide to use a large table format with images on the
top row and blurbs on the second row, enabling readers to compare each
product picture by picture and feature by feature.
   As we can see, the writing and design processes interact recursively.
While sometimes technical communicators start their work with mainly
images, at other times they start with mainly text. As they execute their
plan for a communication artifact, the writing may inﬂuence the design or
vice versa. It is important to allow for this healthy symbiosis between writ-
ing and design by thinking about the integration of the visual and verbal
during the invention and planning phase of technical communication.

   Consider Preferences for and Familiarity with Cues
   Most people prefer sans serif typefaces as they read online—whether
they are children, college students, senior citizens, or people with low
or corrected vision. A sans serif face for electronic communication will
likely satisfy the preferences of most online readers (Schriver 2009). Chil-
dren, older adults (average age seventy), and readers who are dyslexic have
been found to beneﬁt from reading typefaces (either serif or sans serif)
set between 12 points and 14 points, with most people preferring 14-point
type over 12-point type (Bernard, Liao, and Mills 2001; Wilkins et al. 2009;
O’Brien, Masﬁeld, and Legge 2005). However, as we consider people’s
preferences for typographic cues, it is important not only to consider the
point size of a typeface, but also its x-height, a key factor in typeface iden-
tiﬁcation and legibility (see ﬁgure 16.8).
   The x-height refers to the height of a lowercase x in the alphabet of
a given typeface; it is the distance between the baseline of a letterform
(bottom of lowercase x) and the mean line of a letterform (top of lower-
case x). Figure 16.9 illustrates how x-heights may vary from typeface to
typeface. X-heights vary not only in the amount of vertical space they oc-
cupy, but also in the amount of horizontal space they require. In choosing
408 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   One thing we can say with certainty is that people from every culture
appreciate good contrast between the headings and the body copy. This
can be achieved by using one of the following: (1) sans serif type for head-
ings and serif type for body text, (2) a serif type for both headings and body
text, as long as it has good contrast within the face, or (3) a sans serif face
for both headings and body text, again, as long as it has good contrast
within the face.

   Assess the Quality of the Design and the Intelligibility of the Cues
   Even when one has a good idea of the reader’s likely strategies for using
the content, technical communicators must evaluate the goodness of their
predictions by evaluating the content with readers. For example, it may
be that people read typefaces set at smaller point sizes (such as 10-point
type) more slowly because they are less legible, but readers may also re-
member more about what they have read and construct a more accurate
understanding of the text because they are spending more time interpret-
ing it (Dyson 2004). Usability testing can alert us to such speed-accuracy
trade-oﬀs, forcing us to make decisions about which is more important
for the situation. Moreover, usability testing can guide technical commu-
nicators in revising their overall design as well as their visual and verbal
systems for signaling the structure. The ﬁndings of usability testing can
alert us to visual or verbal cues that are missing, incomplete, inconsis-
tently executed, or just plain unclear (Schriver 1991, 1992). As it turns out,
unclear content and omissions make people shut down and stop reading.
When technical communicators combine the use of evidence-based de-
sign heuristics with user-experience testing, they increase the likelihood
that their designs will be read.

extended example
To illustrate the heuristic above, I return to my introduction, in which
Miguel was assigned two tasks: designing the ﬁrst in a series of documents
about healthy eating, and revising the visual design of a ﬂyer that Miguel’s
supervisor thought could be used in the series. Let’s look at how Miguel
was able to draw on information-design research and the three-phase heu-
ristic in his redesign of the ﬂyer and design of the prototype.

task 1: redesign a flyer
Miguel began his revision task with the original ﬂyer, shown in ﬁg-
ure 16.10. The supervisor felt the design looked a little dull, but thought
the content was good. The original ﬂyer extended over two pages and was
intended to function as a summary of the foods that research had found
410 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
Figure 16.10. The original document listing healthy foods

to be the most nutritious. The ﬁrst thing Miguel noticed was that the ﬂyer
was worse than dull; it was ugly. He doubted whether members of the in-
tended audience would read it. He diagnosed the problem as one of lack
of contrast, noticing that it did not signal the content very well. Miguel
wanted to employ a less routine typeface than Times Roman. He felt that
he could come up with a better layout that would cue the relationship be-
tween the names of the food and the explanation about why those foods
were healthy choices. Miguel also questioned whether the alphabetical
                                                              Information Design | 411


          (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
          Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
          permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
structure made it boring, but decided to keep that organization and focus
mainly on revising the visual display of the content.
   Figure 16.11 shows Miguel’s revision. He employed the same content,
but gave it a more explicit structure. First, he changed the visual format
from a list to a table. In so doing, he removed the gray background to
increase the contrast and thereby improve the legibility. Miguel suspects
that shifting the display to a tabular format will promote quicker access of
the content, but he decides to wait until he pilot tests the redesign before
he makes this claim to his supervisor.
   Second, he changed the typography from a serif face (Times Roman)
to a sans serif face (Frutiger), employing mixed styles and weights within
the Frutiger family for the side heads and the body copy. He used Frutiger
bold condensed for the side heads “healthy foods,” Frutiger light con-
densed for the elaboration of the foods, and Frutiger light for the expla-
nations—the part that he felt needed typography with a larger x-height.
Miguel also revised the typography for displaying the major heading
“healthy foods,” from 12-point Times Roman set in all capital letters to
24-point Apple Chancery using title capitalization. These typographic up-
dates improve the attractiveness of the ﬂyer and increase the contrast be-
tween the major heading and the list of foods, their elaboration, and the
explanations. Third, Miguel altered the verbal structure by shifting from
the topic-based title “healthy foods” to the question “healthy eating?”
   In addition, Miguel paired the heading “healthy foods” with the sce-
nario heading “why they’re good for you.” Scenario headings orient the
content from the reader’s perspective (Flower, Hayes, and Swarts 1983).
Miguel highlighted these linguistic cues by reversing the type for the col-
umn heads (white type on gray background). Miguel’s tabular format for
the body copy makes referencing why a given food is nutritious easier than
the original format, which made the blurbs appear as miniparagraphs.
Although Miguel’s revision is clearly better than the original, we can see
that the text needs further modiﬁcation if it is to be understood by par-
ents. Miguel reassures his supervisor that in his next iteration, he will
replace words such as monounsaturated and bioﬂavonoids.

task 2: design a prototype
Miguel’s second task was to design a paper prototype for the series on nu-
trition. His supervisor recommended that he start with a one-page hand-
out, suggesting that after it met with his approval, he would assign Miguel
more complex tasks. His supervisor was interested in seeing whether
Miguel could draw on his original research to design the content for the
prototype.
412 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   Phase 1: Group Content into Rhetorical Clusters
   Miguel began by thinking about his audience as he sorted through the
information he had collected in his research. He had identiﬁed what he
thought were the top ﬁfty empirical ﬁndings about nutrition. Miguel was
surprised that so many things he had heard about healthy eating were ei-
ther only partly true or completely wrong. He felt that many people might
be mystiﬁed about the science of nutrition and that his goal would be to
help to set the record straight.
   Miguel had also collected many photographs, drawings, and cartoons
in order to illustrate healthy choices. For example, he had assembled
drawings of people eating, photos of fruits and vegetables, close-ups of
whole grains, cartoons of people overeating, photos of lean meat, draw-
ings of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s food pyramid (and its revi-
sion, the food plate). This abundance of material proved a bit overwhelm-
ing, and Miguel needed a strategy for organizing the ﬁrst piece in the
series.
   Figure 16.12 presents a progression of pencil sketches Miguel created
in coming up with ideas for the prototype. He began by grouping the ﬁnd-
ings about nutrition according to topic (left side of top row), starting with
types of foods: fruits, grains, vegetables, protein, and so on. He consid-
ered what the topics might look like if arrayed as a list or as links with
nested content (right side of top row).
   Next he organized his photos and visuals by sorting them according to
size, kind of image, and color (left side of middle row). This led him to
draft a few additional structures (right side of middle row). He considered
a paragraph-photograph sequence arranged vertically, which he thought
might serve to associate key photos with the text. Then he entertained a
picture-in-picture format, with a collage of foods as a background image
and several small photos that highlighted the immediate topic. He also
thought about using a line chart (showing how the average American’s
weight had increased over the years) with a pop-out textual blurb about
the problem of obesity.
   Still not convinced he had a workable structure, Miguel then explored
designing rhetorical clusters for the goals of (1) narrating and explaining
and (2) showing comparisons and explaining (third row of ﬁgure 16.12). He
ﬁrst sketched a time line that integrated text and graphics to show how
ideas about healthy eating had evolved (left side of third row). Then he
considered using a few matrix formats to show key comparisons among
pieces of the content, such as ideas about healthy eating in the 1980s ver-
sus 2010s, or things that people believe to be true about healthy eating, but
that are actually false (right side of third row).
414 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
to set the tone and to attract the eye to inspect the content. He sorted
through the many visuals he had collected, looking for photos that had
a similar look and color value, especially for realistic soft-edge photos of
nutritious food. Once he made his selections, he resized the photos and
cropped them to ﬁt the grid. He wrote and edited the text for the set of
“myths and facts,” so that each item was roughly the same length.

    Phase 3: Signal Structural Relations
    Miguel then worked through the ﬁnal phase of the heuristic, “signal
structural relations,” to produce a draft of the prototype. He attempted to
integrate the overall appearance of the layout with a major heading that
spans columns 2 and 3, “Healthy Eating?” (He purposefully employed the
same major heading and displayed it using the same typeface as the ﬁrst
ﬂyer. Miguel’s intent with these repetitions was to start a document fam-
ily, one with a uniﬁed visual and thematic identity.) Miguel then format-
ted the body text to ﬁt columns 2 and 3 and gave each a heading, “Myths”
and “Facts.” He stacked the photos of fruits and vegetables in the ﬁrst
column and removed any white space between them. Once he completed
the draft, he asked his information-design colleague Louise to look it over
and oﬀer some feedback. Miguel’s initial draft and the comments from
his colleague are displayed in ﬁgure 16.15.
    As Louise’s comments show, there were several problems with the infor-
mation design of Miguel’s prototype. The headings “Myths” and “Facts”
that were to preview the itemized content did not function very well be-
cause their spatial position violated the Gestalt principle of proximity,
which suggests that “elements that are close together are perceived to be
more related than elements that are farther apart” (Lidwell, Holden, and
Butler 2003, 160). The headings “Myths” and “Facts” needed to be closer
to the actual content. As Louise pointed out, the “headers ﬂoat within
the gray bar.” Similarly, a Gestalt problem of proximity was created by the
horizontal position of the itemized “myths” (in column 2); the text was
too close to the photos, and there was too much white space between
columns 2 and 3.
    Louise noticed that the heading “Facts” (column 3) was touching the
major heading “Healthy Eating?,” a typographic oversight on Miguel’s
part. Louise also mentioned that the heading “Facts” was not centered
over the column, but shifted slightly to the right.
    Louise’s biggest problem by far with the prototype was the spatial po-
sitioning of the itemized content. The horizontal positioning of the items
was unhelpful in guiding readers to make quick and appropriate compari-
sons between the myths and facts. That there were six clusters of myths
418 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
mended that Miguel think of a clear way to make it obvious that there
were six clusters, each with two items, a myth and a fact.
    Miguel considered each of Louise’s constructive criticisms. He began
his revisions with the easier ones to execute. First he worked on improving
the proximity relations between the headings and the itemized content.
He did so by moving the headings to align with the bottom of the gray bar
(at the top of the layout) and by making sure the headings were indeed
centered over columns 2 and 3. Next he standardized the line length of
the items, so that each had a similar visual shape and occupied no more
and no less than three lines of type. This move allowed him to achieve the
horizontal alignment he sought, displaying each myth on the same line
as each fact. Miguel realized that while he had worked hard to make the
writing for the “myths and facts” parallel, editing each item for length
and syntax (e.g., see item 6), he had neglected to use clear visual signals
to make those parallels evident. Miguel agreed with Louise about the need
for a diﬀerent strategy for signaling the itemized content. After a few more
drafts, Miguel made the six clusters more visible with two additional re-
visions. Initially he moved the columns closer together (creating better
proximal relations). Then he inserted a thin gray rule between each clus-
ter, making the format resemble that of a table. Miguel’s ﬁnal version is
shown in ﬁgure 16.16.
    Miguel was pleased with his ﬁnal result, but wanted the opportunity to
test his draft before he considered it ﬁnished. He was curious to know if
the design encouraged reading and whether the main points were clear. As
he looked over the six clusters of myths and facts, he questioned whether
it was a wise idea to include messages about only two foods—potatoes and
cheese—in the context of more general points about nutrition (see items 3
and 4). He considered moving those items to another text he would create
later, but ran out of time before he needed to meet with his supervisor.
    Miguel’s supervisor was very satisﬁed with his work and believed it was
an excellent prototype on which they could base other short pieces. He felt
it would make a good ﬁrst impression with readers—that it was clear and
conveyed a positive persona—and would show that the Department of Agri-
culture cared about helping citizens understand healthy eating. Of course,
he noticed the advice about potatoes and cheese. He said that including
these items made the content’s level of abstraction inconsistent across
the list. But he thought the advice was good and that these foods had been
connected to obesity. His ﬁnal call was to keep the spotlight on potatoes
and cheese. He also approved Miguel’s request to test the prototype and
suggested that Miguel create a plan to assess the quality of the entire series.


420 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
order to improve the visual display of their content. Rather, they need to
be willing to devote the time it takes to excel in three key activities:
  • grouping content rhetorically,
  • organizing content visually, and
  • signaling structural relationships.
   The research presented in this chapter provides very strong evidence
that each of these activities can help improve readers’ engagement with
content. These activities are especially powerful when they are employed
iteratively and when they are combined with usability testing. Content
that has been shaped by these activities and followed up with usability
testing is likely to be easier to understand, more used, better liked, and
better remembered. Moreover, each component of the information-design
heuristic is supported by empirical evidence.
   As the case study of Miguel’s design process shows, using the heuris-
tic helped him consider diﬀerent visual structures for his content. His
pencil sketches were a valuable catalyst to his design thinking. Seeing the
options, even in very rough form, allowed him to imagine the resulting
documents more fully and eliminate those designs that would likely be in-
eﬀective. And the feedback from his information-design colleague helped
him recognize that he needed to worry about the consistency of visual
cues just as much as consistency in writing and editing.
   Taken as a whole, the research tells us that information design is nei-
ther decoration nor artiﬁce. Rather, good information design supports
readers’ cognitive and emotional interactions with content. In this way,
information design is about enabling communication. My research on
expertise in information design suggests that as technical communica-
tors become more sensitive to the graphic, spatial, and typographic pos-
sibilities for their content, they become more ﬂexible and more skilled in
designing messages (Schriver 2012).
   The expansion of technical communicators’ concern from focusing
mainly on verbal aspects of messages to both visual and verbal aspects is
important because many messages are never read. At ﬁrst glance, people
judge them to be too complicated, boring, or ugly. As technical commu-
nicators develop their expertise in information design, they will be better
able meet their readers’ cognitive and emotional needs for content. They
will also ﬁnd that information design is not about the details, such as
choosing between serif and sans serif typefaces (although the details are
important), but rather about the big picture—that is, building bridges to
make sure people engage with the message. That means understanding


422 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
the content people need, structuring it in ways that invite engagement,
and envisioning novel ways to shape the message. The hardest part of the
work lies in building those rhetorical bridges.

   discussion questions
1. Take another look at ﬁgure 16.2, the heuristic for structuring content
   visually. In your opinion, which of the three phases will be the most
   diﬃcult for students whose educational background has focused
   mainly on writing? What aspects of visual design do you think will be
   most challenging for you? What aspects interest you most?
2. People may respond emotionally as well as cognitively to the commu-
   nications they read. Think about the last time you reacted emotionally
   to a document or a website. How did you respond? Excited? Enthusi-
   astic? Annoyed? Frustrated? What was it that made you react as you
   did? What were the characteristics of the message or its presentation
   that triggered your response? What role did good or bad information
   design play in how you felt?
3. Look at the seven grouping techniques presented in ﬁgure 16.3. Think
   of a topic in technical communication that could be organized in vari-
   ous ways. Choose two of the grouping techniques and describe how
   the topic could be organized using each technique. In your opinion,
   which one provides the best structure for the content? Why?
4. Find a short example of poor information design (two pages or two
   screen captures). Make an electronic version of the example so you can
   display it for the class. Prepare a short presentation in which you ﬁrst
   analyze the stakeholders for the example and their likely purposes for
   using the communication. Then draw on information-design research
   and the heuristic in ﬁgure 16.2 as a framework for evaluating why the
   information design is inadequate. As you discuss the example, identify
   the speciﬁc visual or verbal features that make the design poor.
5. Collect a set of four articles written on a single scientiﬁc or technical
   topic (e.g., nanotechnology, sleep disorders, cloud technology, electric
   cars). Two of the articles should be written for a lay audience (e.g., from
   Science News) and the other two for professionals in the ﬁeld (e.g., Sci-
   ence). Analyze the articles for the ways they organize the content. Are
   similar structures employed for expert and novice audiences? What
   are the key diﬀerences among the visuals included? Are they eﬀective?
   What can we learn from these practices?
6. Choose a local nonproﬁt agency and collect a sample of their paper
   and electronic documents. Create screen captures of their website and


                                                            Information Design | 423


         (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
         Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
         permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
    print out representative pages that typify the agency’s design moves.
    Analyze the documents for their writing and visual display of the con-
    tent. What tone and persona do the designs project? Do paper and
    online versions give similar impressions?
 7. Gather the paper documents and the printouts of the website you col-
    lected from the nonproﬁt agency. Lay out the document set on a large
    table, side by side: paper and online documents. Assess the impres-
    sion the document set creates “as a family.” Is it easy to tell that all of
    the documents are designed by the same agency? Are there elements
    that make the organizational voice inconsistent? Create a class presen-
    tation in which you detail your analysis, pointing out recommenda-
    tions that you would make to the agency for improving the coherence
    and consistency of their communications.
 8. Collect an example of the front page of your favorite electronic news-
    paper or service. Capture the image electronically and then import it
    to a design program, such as Adobe Illustrator. “Select the entire page”
    and use the software to “gray out the transparency of the page” so you
    can still see the shapes of the textual and graphic elements, but not
    read them. Then, use the software’s tools to trace the grid of the page
    and make a grid overlay. Pay attention to the underlying structure of
    the body copy and graphics. Save the original page in full color and the
    page with your grid overlay. Bring the ﬁles to class and be prepared to
    describe how the content is displayed. How many columns and rows
    are employed in the design? What are they used for? Why is the infor-
    mation grouped as it is?
 9. Choose a commercial organization with an online presence that has
    online competitors (e.g., banks, software manufacturers, airlines,
    rental car agencies, hotel chains, consumer product makers). Iden-
    tify three websites that represent the competition (e.g., three diﬀerent
    airlines). Collect screen captures from their websites. Then select two
    key features that are relatively similar across the websites that can be
    compared. For example, for airlines you could assess the booking in-
    formation or trip-planning tools. Compare and contrast the three sites
    by making a series of tables that highlight the similarities and diﬀer-
    ences in their design strategy. Prepare a short report that discusses
    your ﬁndings.
10. Look for a document that presents an information design you admire.
    “Reverse engineer” the document—that is, try to identify the visual
    and verbal strategies that make it tick. Drawing on the research in in-
    formation design, discuss why you think the document is eﬀective.


424 | Chapter 16


        (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
        Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
        permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   note
   1. For a discussion of Gestalt principles applied to information design, see Schriver 1997,
303–326.



works cited
Anderson, John R. 2009. Cognitive psychology and its implications. 7th ed. New York: Worth
   Publishers.
Bernard, Michael L., C. H. Liao, and M. Mills. 2001. The eﬀects of font type and size on the
   legibility and reading time of online text by older adults. In Proceedings of the Special
   Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction Extended Abstracts ’01, 175–176. New York:
   Association of Computing Machinery. http: // psychology.wichita.edu / hci / projects /
   elderly.pdf.
Bernard, Michael L., and M. Mills. 2000. So, what size and type of font should I use on my
   website? Usability News 2 (2). http: // www.wsupsy.psy.twsu.edu / surl / usabilitynews / 2S /
   font.htm.
Bernard, Michael L., M. Mills, M. Peterson, and K. Storrer. 2001. A comparison of popular
   online fonts: Which is best and when? Usability News 3 (2). http: // psychology.wichita
   .edu / surl / usabilitynews / 3s / font.htm.
Breland, K., and M. K. Breland. 1944. Legibility of newspaper headlines printed in capitals
   and in lower case. Journal of Applied Psychology 28:117–120.
Brumberger, Eva, and Kathryn Northcut. 2012. Designing texts: Teaching visual
   communication. Amityville, NY: Baywood.
Coles, P., and J. J. Foster. 1975. Typographic cuing as an aid to learning from typewritten
   text. Programmed Learning and Educational Technology 12:102–108.
Dyson, Mary C. 2004. How physical text layout aﬀects reading from screen. Behaviour and
   Information Technology 23 (6): 377–393.
Farkas, David K. 2005. Explicit structure in print and on-screen documents. Technical
   Communication Quarterly 14 (1): 9–30.
Flower, Linda, John R. Hayes, and H. Swarts. 1983. Revising functional documents: The
   scenario principle. In New essays in technical and scientiﬁc communication, edited by
   P. V. Anderson, R. J. Brockmann, and C. R. Miller, 41–58. New York: Baywood Press.
Frascara, Jorge. 2010. Data, information, design and traﬃc injuries. VideoLectures.net,
   March. http: // videolectures.net / aml2010_frascara_diti /.
Ivory, Melody Y., Rashmi R. Sinha, and Marti A. Hearst. 2001. Empirically validated web
   page design metrics. In Proceedings of the 2001 Human Factors in Computing Systems
   Conference, edited by Michel Beaudouin-Lafon and Robert J. K. Jacob, 53–60. New
   York: ACM.
Jenkins, S. E., and B. L. Cole. 1982. The eﬀect of the density of background elements on
   the conspicuity of objects. Vision Research 22:1241–1252.
Kahn, M., K. C. Tan, and R. J. Beaton. 1990. Reduction of cognitive workload through
   information chunking. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 34th
   Annual Meeting, edited by D. Woods and E. Roth, 1509–1513. Santa Monica, CA: Human
   Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Keyes, E. 1993. Typography, color, and information structure. Technical Communication 40
   (4): 638–654.
Köhler, W. 1947. Gestalt psychology. New York: Liveright.


                                                                 Information Design | 425


            (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
            Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
            permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
Lidwell, William, Kritina Holden, and Jill Butler. 2003. Universal principles of design.
   Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers.
Lindgaard, Gitte, Gary Fernandes, Cathy Dudek, and J. Brown. 2006. Attention web
   designers: You have 50 milliseconds to make a good ﬁrst impression! Behaviour and
   Information Technology 25 (2): 115–126.
Malamed, Connie. 2009. Visual language for designers: Principles for creating graphics that
   people understand. Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers.
Miller, G. A. 1956. The magic number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our
   capacity for processing information. Psychological Review 63:81–97.
Müller-Brockmann, J. 1985. Grid systems in graphic design. Revised ed. New York: Hastings
   House.
Mullet, Kevin, and Darrell Sano. 1995. Designing visual interfaces: Communication oriented
   techniques. Mountain View, CA: SunSoft Press.
Muter, P., and P. Marrutto. 1991. Reading and skimming from computer screens and
   books: The paperless oﬃce revisited? Behaviour and Information Technology 10:257–266.
Nielson, Jakob. 2006. Progressive disclosure. Alertbox: useit.com, December 4. http: // www
   .useit.com / alertbox / progressive-disclosure.html.
Niemela, M., and J. Saarinen. 2000. Visual search for grouped versus ungrouped icons in a
   computer interface. Human Factors 42 (4): 630–635.
O’Brien, Beth A., Stephen J. Masﬁeld, and Gordon E. Legge. 2005. The eﬀect of print size
   on reading speed in dyslexia. Journal of Research in Reading 28 (3): 332–349.
Outing, Steve, and Laura Ruel. 2004. Eyetrack III: Online news consumer behavior in the
   age of multimedia. http: // poynterextra.org / eyetrack2004 / index.htm.
Ozok, A. A., and G. Salvendy. 2000. Measuring consistency of web page design and its
   eﬀects on performance and satisfaction. Ergonomics 43 (4): 443–460.
Paivio, A. 1969. Mental imagery in associative learning and memory. Psychological Review
   76:241–263.
———. 1990. Mental representations: A dual coding approach. New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Parush, A., R. Nadir, and A. Schtub. 1998. Evaluating the layout of graphical user interface
   screens: Validation of a numerical computerized model. International Journal of
   Human- Computer Interaction 10 (4): 343–360.
Paterson, D. G., and M. A. Tinker. 1946. Readability of newspaper headlines printed in
   capitals and lower case. Journal of Applied Psychology 30 (April): 161–168.
Pirolli, Peter, and Stuart K. Card. 1999. Information foraging. Psychological Review 106 (4):
   643–675.
Reece, Gloria Ann. 2002. Text legibility for web documents and low vision. PhD
   dissertation, University of Memphis.
Rickards, E. C., and G. J. August. 1975. Generative underlining strategies in prose recall.
   Journal of Educational Psychology 67:860–865.
Sadoski, Mark, and Allan Paivio. 2001. Imagery and text: A dual coding theory of reading and
   writing. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Samara, Timothy. 2002. Making and breaking the grid. Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers.
Scharﬀ, Lauren, Alyson Hill, and Albert Ahumada. 2000. Discriminability measures for
   predicting readability of text on textured backgrounds. Optics Express 6 (4): 81–91.
Schriver, K. A. 1989. Evaluating text quality: The continuum from text-focused to reader-
   focused methods. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication 32 (4): 238–255.
———. 1991. Plain language through protocol-aided revision. In Plain language: Principles

426 | Chapter 16


          (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
          Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
          permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
   and practice, edited by E. R. Steinberg, 148–172. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University
   Press.
———. 1992. Teaching writers to anticipate readers’ needs: A classroom-evaluated
   pedagogy. Written Communication 9 (2): 179–208.
———. 1997. Dynamics in document design: Creating texts for readers. New York: John Wiley
   and Sons.
———. 2009. Using design to get people to read and keep reading. Health Literacy Out
   Loud Podcast (HLOL), December 12. http: // www.healthliteracyoutloud.com / ?s=schriver.
———. 2010. Reading on the web: Implications for online information design. Ljubljana
   Museum of Architecture and Design Lecture Series on Visual Communications
   Theory: On Information Design. http: // videolectures.net / aml2010_schriver_rotw /.
———. 2011. La retórica del rediseño en contextos burocráticos (The rhetoric of redesign
   in bureaucratic settings). In Information design, edited by Jorge Frascara, 156–165.
   Buenos Aires: Ediciones Inﬁnito.
———. 2012. What we know about expertise in professional communication. In Past,
   present, and future contributions of cognitive writing research to cognitive psychology,
   edited by Virginia W. Berninger, 275–312. New York: Psychology Press.
Spencer, H., L. Reynolds, and B. Coe. 1974. Typographic coding in lists and bibliographies.
   Applied Ergonomics 5:136–141.
Spyridakis, J. H. 1989a. Signalling eﬀects: Part I. Journal of Technical Writing and
   Communication 19 (1): 227–239.
———. 1989b. Signalling eﬀects: Part II. Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 19
   (4): 395–415.
Stark Adam, Pegie, Sara Quinn, and Rick Edmonds. 2007. Eyetracking the news: A study of
   print and online reading. St. Petersburg, FL: Poynter Institute for Media Studies.
Theofanos, Mary Frances, and Janice Redish. 2005. Helping low-vision and other
   users with web sites that meet their needs: Is one site for all feasible? Technical
   Communication 52 (1): 9–20.
Tufte, E. R. 1983. The visual display of quantitative information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics
   Press.
Tullis, T. S. 1997. Screen design. In Handbook of human-computer interaction, edited by
   M. Helander, T. K. Landauer, and P. Prabhu, 503–531. New York: Elsevier Science.
Vartabedian, A. G. 1971. The eﬀects of letter size, case, and generation method on CRT
   display search time. Human Factors 13 (4): 363–368.
Weinschenk, Susan. 2009. It’s a myth that all capital letters are inherently harder to read.
   What Makes Them Click: Applied Psychology to Understand How People Think, Work, and
   Relate, December 23. http: // www.whatmakesthemclick.net / 2009 / 12 / 23 / 100-things-you
   -should-know-about-people-19-its-a-myth-that-all-capital-letters-are-inherently-harder
   -to-read /.
Wertheimer, M. 1922. Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt: 1. Prinzipielle
   Bemerkungen. Psychologische Forschung 1:47–58.
Wilkins, Arnold, Roanna Cleave, Nicola Grayson, and Louise Wilson. 2009. Typography
   for children may be inappropriately designed. Journal of Research in Reading 32 (4):
   402–412.




                                                               Information Design | 427


           (© University of Chicago Press. All rights reserved.
           Posting, copying, or distributing in print or electronic form without
           permission of UCP would be easy, but it's illegal. We're trusting you.)
